RECOGNISING their longstanding and strong partnership and the need to
strengthen their close economic and trade relations;

CONVINCED that this Agreement will create an expanded and secure market
for goods and services and a stable and predictable environment for
investment, thus enhancing the competitiveness of their firms in global
markets;

SEEKING to establish clear and mutually advantageous rules governing their
trade and investment while recognising the right of the Parties to take
measures necessary to achieve legitimate public policy objectives;

COMMITTED to contributing to the harmonious development and expansion
of world trade by removing obstacles to trade through the creation of a free
trade area;

AFFIRMING their commitment to fostering the development of an open
market economy in Asia, and to encouraging the economic integration of
Asian economies in order to further the liberalisation of trade and investment
in the region;

RECOGNISING the different levels of economic development between the
Parties;

DESIRING to promote economic growth, create new employment
opportunities, raise living standards and improve public welfare;

RESOLVED to promote transparency and combat corruption as regards all
relevant interested parties, including the private sector;

BUILDING on their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization and other multilateral,
regional, and bilateral agreements to which both Parties are party; and

REAFFIRMING their desire to build upon their commitments under the
Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation among the
Governments of the Republic of Korea and the Member Countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations as well as other relevant agreements
pursuant to the Framework Agreement;

HAVE AGREED as follows:

CHAPTER ONE
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1.1: General Definitions
For purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified,

Agreement on Agriculture means the Agreement on Agriculture, in Annex
1A to the WTO Agreement;

Anti-Dumping Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of
Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, in Annex 1A
to the WTO Agreement;

customs administration means authority that is responsible under the law of
each Party for the administration and enforcement of its customs laws and
regulations:

(a) for Korea, the Ministry of Economy and Finance, or the Korea
Customs Service, or their respective successors; and

(b) for Cambodia, the General Department of Customs and Excise
of Cambodia;

customs duties means any customs or import duty and a charge of any kind
imposed in connection with the importation of a good, but does not include
any:

(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with
Article III:2 of the GATT 1994, in respect of like, directly
competitive, or substitutable goods of a Party, or in respect of
goods from which the imported good has been manufactured or
produced in whole or in part;

(b) duty imposed pursuant to a Party’s laws and regulations
consistently with Chapter Five (Trade Remedies);

(c) fee or other charge in connection with importation commensurate
with the cost of services rendered;

(d) duty imposed pursuant to Article 5 of the Agreement on
Agriculture, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement; or

(e) premiums offered or collected on an imported good arising out of
any tendering system in respect of the administration of
quantitative import restrictions or tariff rate quotas;

customs laws and regulations means the statutory and regulatory provisions
relating to the importation, exportation, movement, or storage of goods, the
administration and enforcement of which are specifically charged to the
customs administration, and any regulations made by the customs
administration, under its statutory powers;

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of
Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, in Annex 1A
to the WTO Agreement;

days means calendar days, including weekends and holidays;
existing means in effect on the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

GATS means the General Agreement on Trade in Services, in Annex 1B to
the WTO Agreement;

GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994,
including its notes and supplementary provisions, which is a part of the WTO
Agreement;

goods means any merchandise, product, article, or material;

Harmonised System (HS) means the nomenclature of the Harmonised
Commodity Description and Coding System defined in the International
Convention on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System,
including all legal notes thereto, as in force and as amended from time to time;

Joint Committee means the Korea-Cambodia Free Trade Agreement Joint
Committee established under Article 10.1 (Joint Committee);

juridical person means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise
organised under applicable laws and regulations, whether for profit or
otherwise, and whether private-owned or government-owned, including any
corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship, or association;

Korea-ASEAN FTA means the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive
Economic Cooperation among the Governments of the Republic of Korea and
the Member Countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and other
relevant agreements stipulated in paragraph 1 of Article 1.4 of the Framework
Agreement;

measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law,
regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other form;

measures adopted or maintained by a Party means measures adopted or
maintained by:

(a) central or local governments and authorities; and

(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of power delegated by
central or local governments and authorities;

national means:

(a) for Korea, a Korean national within the meaning of the
Nationality Act, as amended; and

(b) for Cambodia, any person who is a Khmer citizen within the
meaning of the Constitution of the Kingdom of Cambodia and
the Royal Kram No. NS/RKM/0618/008, dated 21 June 2018,
promulgating the Law on Nationality, or as may be amended;

originating goods means products or materials that qualify as originating
under Chapter Three (Rules of Origin);

person means a natural person or a juridical person;

Safeguards Agreement means the Agreement on Safeguards, in Annex 1A to
the WTO Agreement;

SCM Agreement means the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing
Measures, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

technical regulations, standards, and conformity assessment procedures
shall have the meanings assigned to those terms in Annex 1 of the Agreement
on Technical Barriers to Trade, contained in Annex | to the WTO Agreement
(hereinafter referred to as the “TBT Agreement’).

territory means:

(a) for Korea, the land, maritime, and airspace under its
sovereignty, and those maritime areas, including the seabed and
subsoil adjacent to and beyond the outer limit of the territorial
seas over which it exercises sovereign rights or jurisdiction in
accordance with international law and its domestic law; and

(b) for Cambodia, the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia, as
well as those maritime areas, including the seabed and subsoil
adjacent to the outer limits of the territorial sea and airspace
over which the Kingdom of Cambodia exercises, in accordance
with international law, sovereign rights or jurisdiction;

WTO means the World Trade Organization; and

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World
Trade Organization, done on 15 April 1994.

Article 1.2: Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties, consistent with Article XXIV of GATT 1994 and Article V of
GATS, hereby establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of
this Agreement.

Article 1.3: Objectives

The objectives of this Agreement are to:

(a) achieve the substantial liberalisation of trade in goods between
the Parties, in conformity with Article XXIV of GATT 1994;

(b) achieve the substantial liberalisation of trade in services
between the Parties, in conformity with Article V of GATS;

(c) promote competition in their economies, particularly as it
relates to economic relations between the Parties;

(d) enhance transparency of trade and investment related measures
of the Parties by sharing best regulatory practices and
promoting innovation in areas of mutual interest; and

(e) establish a framework for furthering cooperation to expand and
enhance the benefits of this Agreement.
Article 1.4: Relations to Other Agreements
1. The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under existing bilateral

and multilateral agreements to which both Parties are party, including the
WTO Agreement and the Korea-ASEAN FTA.

2. For greater certainty, this Agreement shall not be construed to derogate
from any international legal obligation between the Parties that provides for
more favourable treatment of goods, services, investments, or persons than that
provided for under this Agreement.

3. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, in the event of any
inconsistency between this Agreement and any agreement to which both
Parties are party, the Parties shall consult with each other with a view to
finding a mutually satisfactory solution taking into consideration the general
principles of international law.

Article 1.5: Extent of Obligations

Each Party shall, subject to the provisions of this Agreement, ensure the
observance of all obligations and commitments under this Agreement by its
local governments and authorities, and by non-governmental bodies in the
exercise of governmental powers delegated to them by central, and local
governments or authorities.

CHAPTER TWO
TRADE IN GOODS

Section A: Common Provisions

Article 2.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:

commercial samples of negligible value means commercial samples having
a value, individually or in the aggregate as shipped, of not more than the
amount specified in a Party’s laws, regulations, or procedures governing
temporary admission, or so marked, torn, perforated, or otherwise treated that
they are unsuitable for sale or use except as commercial samples;

consular transactions means requirements that goods of a Party intended for
export to the territory of the other Party must first be submitted to the
supervision of the consul of the importing Party in the territory of the
exporting Party for the purpose of obtaining consular invoices or consular
visas for commercial invoices, certificates of origin, manifests, shippers’
export declarations, or any other customs documentation required on or in
connection with importation;

duty-free means free of customs duty;

import licensing means an administrative procedure requiring the
submission of an application or other documentation (other than that
generally required for customs clearance purposes) to the relevant
administrative body as a prior condition for importation into the territory of
the importing Party; and

non-tariff measures means policy measures other than ordinary customs
tariffs that can potentially have an economic effect on international trade in
goods, changing quantities traded or prices or both.

Article 2.2: Scope and Coverage

2-1

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply to
trade in goods between the Parties.

Section B: National Treatment

Article 2.3: National Treatment

Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in
accordance with Article II of GATT 1994 including its interpretative notes. To
this end, Article II of GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes shall, mutatis
mutandis, be incorporated into and form part of this Agreement.

Section C: Tariff Reduction or Elimination

Article 2.4: Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall
increase any existing customs duty as specified in its Schedule in Annex 2-A,
or adopt any new customs duty, on an originating good.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall
gradually reduce or eliminate its customs duties on originating goods in
accordance with its Schedule in Annex 2-A.

3. On the request of either Party, the Parties shall consult to consider
accelerating the reduction or elimination of customs duties set out in their
Schedules in Annex 2-A. An agreement by the Parties to accelerate the
reduction or elimination of a customs duty on a good shall supersede any duty
rate or staging category determined pursuant to their Schedules in Annex 2-A
for that good when approved by each Party in accordance with its applicable
legal procedures.

4. A Party may unilaterally accelerate the reduction or elimination of
customs duties set out in its Schedule in Annex 2-A at any time if it so wishes.
Such Party shall notify the other Party through a diplomatic note immediately
after completion of the internal procedures required for the amendments to

2-2

enter into force.

5. If at any moment a Party reduces its most-favoured-nation (hereinafter
referred to as “MFN”’) applied rate of customs duty after the entry into force of
this Agreement, that duty rate shall apply as regards trade covered by this
Agreement if and for as long as it is lower than the customs duty rate
calculated in accordance with its Schedule in Annex 2-A.

6. For greater certainty, a Party may:

(a) raise a customs duty to the level established in its Schedule in
Annex 2-A following a unilateral reduction or elimination; or

(b) maintain or increase a customs duty as authorised by the Dispute
Settlement Body of the WTO.

Article 2.5: Customs Valuation

For purposes of determining the customs value of goods traded between the
Parties, the provisions of Article VII of GATT 1994, and the provisions of Part
I and the Interpretative Notes of Annex I of the Customs Valuation Agreement
shall apply, mutatis mutandis.

Article 2.6: Transposition of Schedules of Tariff Commitments

Each Party shall ensure that the transposition of its Schedule of tariff
commitments, undertaken in order to implement Annex 2-A in the
nomenclature of the revised HS Code following periodic amendments to the
HS Code, is carried out without impairing the tariff commitments set out in

Annex 2-A, and in accordance with the agreed transposition guidelines, which
are to be adopted by the Committee on Trade in Goods.

Section D: Special Regimes

Article 2.7: Temporary Admission of Goods

2-3

1. Each Party shall allow, as provided for in its laws and regulations, goods
to be brought into its customs territory conditionally relieved, totally or
partially, from payment of import duties and taxes if such goods are brought
into its customs territory for a specific purpose, are intended for re-exportation
within a specific period, and have not undergone any change except normal
depreciation and wastage due to the use made of them.

2. Each Party shall, at the request of the person concerned and for reasons
its customs administration considers valid, extend the time limit for duty-free
temporary admission provided for in paragraph | beyond the period initially
fixed.

3. Neither Party shall condition the duty-free temporary admission of a
good provided for in paragraph 1, other than to require that the good:

(a) be used solely by or under the personal supervision of a national
or resident of the other Party in the exercise of the business
activity, trade, profession, or sport of that person;

(b) not be sold or leased while in its territory;

(c) be accompanied by a security or guarantee in an amount no
greater than the customs duties, taxes, fees, and charges that
would otherwise be owed on entry or final importation,
releasable on exportation of the good;

(d) be capable of identification when imported and exported;

(e) be exported on the departure of the person referred to in
subparagraph (a), or within such other period related to the
purpose of the temporary admission as the Party may establish,

unless extended;

(f) be admitted in no greater quantity than is reasonable for its
intended use; and

(g) be otherwise admissible into the Party’s territory under its laws
and regulations.

4. If any condition that a Party imposes under paragraph 3 has not been

2-4

fulfilled, the Party may apply the customs duty and any other charge that
would normally be owed on the good in addition to any other charges or
penalties provided for under its laws and regulations.

5. Each Party shall permit a good temporarily admitted under this Article
to be re-exported through a customs port other than that through which it was
admitted.

Article 2.8: Duty-free Entry of Commercial Samples of Negligible Value

Each Party shall grant duty-free entry to commercial samples of negligible
value imported from the territory of the other Party, regardless of their origin,
but may require that the samples be imported solely for the solicitation of
orders for goods, or services provided from the territory, subject to its laws and
regulations, of the other Party or a non-Party.

Section E: Non-Tariff Measures

Article 2.9: Application of Non-Tariff Measures

1. A Party shall not adopt or maintain any non-tariff measure on the
importation of any good of the other Party or on the exportation of any good
destined for the territory of the other Party, except in accordance with its WTO
rights and obligations or in accordance with this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall ensure the transparency of its non-tariff measures
permitted in paragraph 1 of this Article and shall ensure that any such
measures are not prepared, adopted or applied with the view to, or with the
effect of, creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

Article 2.10: Import and Export Restrictions

1. | Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall
adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any good
of the other Party or on the exportation or sale for export of any good destined

2-5

for the territory of the other Party, except in accordance with Article XI of
GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes, and to this end Article XI of GATT
1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and made a part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. Where a Party proposes to adopt an import or export prohibition or
restriction on foodstuffs or other products in accordance with paragraph 2 of
Article XI of GATT 1994, the Party shall:

(a) make notification in writing to the extent possible before such
proposed prohibition or restriction is to take effect; and

(b) provide the other Party with an adequate opportunity for
consultation with respect to any matter related to the proposed
prohibition or restriction through appropriate mechanisms, which
may include subcommittees or working groups established by
the Joint Committee.

Article 2.11: Technical Consultations on Non-Tariff Measures

1. A Party may request technical consultations with the other Party
(hereinafter referred to as “the requested Party”) on a measure the Party
considers to be adversely affecting its trade. The request shall be in writing
and shall clearly identify the measure and the concerns as to how the measures
adversely affect trade between the Party requesting technical consultations
(hereinafter referred to as “the requesting Party”) and the requested Party.

2. Where the measures are covered by another Chapter, its Chapter-specific
consultation mechanism shall be used, unless otherwise agreed between the
Parties.

3. Except as provided in Paragraph 2, the requested Party shall respond
and enter into technical consultations within 60 days from the receipt of the
written request referred to in paragraph 1, unless otherwise determined by the
Parties, with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory solution within 180
days from the request. Technical consultations may be conducted via any
means mutually agreed by the Parties.

4. If the requesting Party considers that the matter is urgent or involves

perishable goods, it may request that technical consultations take place within
a shorter time frame than that provided for under paragraph 3.

5. The technical consultations under this Article shall be without prejudice
to rights and obligations pertaining to dispute settlement proceedings under
Chapter Eight (Dispute Settlement) and the WTO Agreement.

Article 2.12: Import Licensing

1. Each Party shall ensure that all automatic and non-automatic import
licensing procedures are implemented in a transparent and predictable manner,
and applied in accordance with the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures
as contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement (hereinafter referred to in
this article as “Import Licensing Agreement”). Neither Party shall adopt or
maintain a measure that is inconsistent with the Import Licensing Agreement.

2. Promptly after this Agreement enters into force, each Party shall notify
the other Party of its existing import licensing procedures, if any. The
notification shall:

(a) include the information specified in Article 5 of the Import
Licensing Agreement; and

(b) be without prejudice as to whether the import licensing
procedure is consistent with this Agreement.

3. Before applying any new or modified import licensing procedure, a
Party shall publish the new procedure or modification on an official
government Internet site. To the extent possible, the Party shall do so at least
21 days before the new procedure or modification takes effect.

4. Neither Party shall apply an import licensing procedure to a good of the

other Party unless the Party has complied with the requirements of paragraph 2
and 3 with respect to that procedure.

Article 2.13: Fees and Formalities Connected with Importation and
Exportation

2-7

1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VIII:1 of GATT
1994 that all fees and charges of whatever character (other than import or
export duties, charges equivalent to an internal tax or other internal charge
applied consistently with Article HI:2 of GATT 1994, and anti-dumping and
countervailing duties) imposed on or in connection with import or export are
limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered and do not
represent an indirect protection to domestic goods or a taxation on imports or
exports for fiscal purposes.

2. Each Party shall promptly publish details of the fees and charges that it
imposes in connection with importation or exportation and shall make such
information available on the internet.

3. Neither Party shall require consular transactions, including related fees
and charges, in connection with the importation of a good of the other Party.
Neither Party shall require that any customs documentation supplied in
connection with the importation of any good of the other Party be endorsed,
certified or otherwise sighted or approved by the importing Party’s overseas
representatives, or persons or entities with authority to act on the importing
Party’s behalf, nor impose any related fees or charges.

Article 2.14: State Trading Enterprises

The rights and obligations of the Parties with respect to state trading
enterprises shall be governed by Article XVII of GATT 1994, its interpretative
notes, and the Understanding on the Interpretation of Article XVI of GATT
1994, which are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis.

Article 2.15: Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The objective of this Article is to protect human, animal or plant life or
health in the Parties’ territories while facilitating trade by minimising the
negative effects on trade between the Parties.

2. This Article shall apply to all Sanitary and Phytosanitary (hereinafter

referred to as “SPS”) measures of the Parties, which may, directly or
indirectly, affect trade between the Parties, taking into account definitions

2-8

under Annex A to the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement
(hereinafter referred to as the “SPS Agreement’).

3. The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations with respect to each
other under the SPS Agreement taking into account relevant decisions of the
WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines and
recommendations.

4. An exporting Party shall provide timely and appropriate information to
an importing Party, where there is a significant change in animal or plant
health status or food safety issue in that exporting Party that may affect trade.

5. The Parties shall opportunely exchange information on SPS matters of
mutual interest under this Article and strengthen technical cooperation,
capacity building and, upon request, consultation opportunities.

6. For purposes of facilitating implementation and communication on SPS
matters of this Article, the Parties shall designate contact points as follows:

(a) for Korea, the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs;
and

(b) for Cambodia, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries;

or their respective successors.

7. Neither Party shall have recourse to Chapter Eight (Dispute Settlement)
for any matter arising under this Article.

Article 2.16: Technical Regulations, Standards and Conformity
Assessment Procedures

1. The Parties reaffirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to
each other under the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, contained in
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the “TBT

Agreement’).

2. The Parties recognise the importance of the provisions relating to

2-9

transparency in the TBT Agreement. In this respect, the Parties shall take into
account relevant decisions and recommendations adopted by the WTO
Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade since 1 January 1995
(G/TBT/1/Rev.14) as may be revised, issued by the WTO Committee on
Technical Barriers to Trade.

3. The Parties agree to use relevant international standards as a basis for
technical regulations and to ensure that central government bodies use relevant
international standards or their relevant parts as a basis for their conformity
assessment procedures, except where, as duly explained upon request, such
international standards or relevant parts would be ineffective or inappropriate
means for the fulfilment of the legitimate objectives as provided in Articles
2.4 and 5.4 of the TBT Agreement respectively.

4. In determining whether an international standard, guide, or
recommendation within the meaning of Articles 2 and 5, and Annex 3 of the
TBT Agreement exists, each Party shall apply the Decision of the Committee
on Principles for the Development of International Standards, Guides and
Recommendations with relation to Articles 2 and 5, and Annex 3 of the
Agreement, adopted on 13 November 2000 by the WTO Committee on
Technical Barriers to Trade (Annex 2 to PART 1 of G/TBT/1/Rev.14), and any
subsequent development thereof. Such international standards shall include,
inter alia, but are not limited to, those developed by the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical
Commission (IEC), the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and
Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC).

5. Where a Party detains, at a port of entry, goods including testing
samples for conformity assessment exported from the other Party due to a
perceived failure to comply with a technical regulation or a conformity
assessment procedure, the reasons for the detention shall be promptly notified
to the importer or his or her representative.

6. Each Party shall designate contact points which shall work jointly in
order to facilitate the implementation of this Article and communication on the
matters of technical barriers to trade arising from this Agreement. The contact
points shall be:

(a) for Korea, the Korean Agency for Technology and Standards;
and

2-10

(b) for Cambodia, Institute of Standards of Cambodia;

or their respective successors.

Section F: Institutional Provisions

Article 2.17: Committee on Trade in Goods

1. For purposes of the effective implementation and operation of this
Chapter and Chapter Five (Trade Remedies), the Parties hereby establish a
Committee on Trade in Goods consisting of representatives of the Parties.

2. The Committee on Trade in Goods shall meet on the request of a Party
or the Joint Committee, at a mutually agreed time, venue, and means, to
consider any matter arising under this Chapter and Chapter Five (Trade
Remedies).

3. The functions of the Committee on Trade in Goods shall include:

(a) reviewing and monitoring the implementation and operation of
this Chapter and Chapter Five (Trade Remedies), and making a
report and recommendation, if appropriate;

(b) promoting trade in goods between the Parties, including through
consultations on accelerating reduction or elimination of customs
duties under this Agreement and other issues as appropriate;

(c) addressing barriers to trade in goods between the Parties,
especially those related to the application of non-tariff measures,
and, if appropriate, referring such matters to the Joint Committee
for its consideration;

(d) addressing any issues related to measure to update each Party’s
Schedule to reflect amendments of Harmonised System,
including adoption and review of transposition guidelines, the
transposition of the Parties’ Schedules of tariff commitments and
exchanging transposed Schedules of tariff commitments and

(f)

correlation tables in a timely manner;

discussing any matter arising under this Chapter and Chapter
Five (Trade Remedies) as agreed; and

designating contact points, upon request of either Party, which

facilitate communications on specific matters arising from this
Chapter and Chapter Five (Trade Remedies).

2-12

CHAPTER THREE
RULES OF ORIGIN

Section A: Rules of Origin

Article 3.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:

CIF means the value of the good imported, and includes the cost of freight and
insurance up to the port or place of entry into the country of importation;

competent authority means the government authority or authorities
designated by a Party and notified to the other Party;

exporter means a natural or juridical person located in the territory of a Party
from where goods are exported by such a person;

FOB means the free-on-board value of a good, inclusive of the cost of
transport from the producer to the port or site of final shipment abroad;

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles means those principles
recognised by consensus or with substantial authoritative support in a Party
with respect to the recording of revenues, expenses, costs, assets, and
liabilities; the disclosure of information; and the preparation of financial
statements. These principles may encompass broad guidelines for general
application as well as detailed standards, practices and procedures;

goods shall include materials or products, which can be wholly obtained or
produced, even if they are intended for later use as materials in another
production process. For purposes of this Chapter, the terms “goods” and
“products” can be used interchangeably and the terms “good” and “product”
shall be interpreted accordingly;

Harmonised System shall have the meaning as defined in Article 1.1
(General Definitions);

importer means a natural or juridical person located in the territory of a Party
into where goods are imported by such a person;

issuing body means an entity designated or authorised by a Party to issue a

Certificate of Origin and notified to the other Party in accordance with this
Chapter;

3-1

fungible goods or materials means goods or materials that are
interchangeable for commercial purposes, whose properties are essentially
identical;

materials shall include ingredients, raw materials, parts, components, sub-
assemblies used in the production process;

non-originating goods or non-originating materials mean goods or
materials which do not qualify as originating in accordance with this Chapter;

originating goods shall have the meaning as defined in Article 1.1 (General
Definitions);

packing materials and containers for the transportation means the goods
used to protect a good during its transportation, different from those materials
or containers used for its retail sale;

preferential tariff treatment means tariff concessions granted to originating
goods as reflected by the tariff rates applicable under this Agreement;

Product Specific Rules means the rules that specify that the materials have
undergone a change in tariff classification or a specific manufacturing or
processing operation, or satisfy a regional value content or a combination of
any of these criteria;

producer means a person who engages in the production of goods;

production means methods of obtaining a good including growing, mining,
harvesting, raising, breeding, extracting, gathering, collecting, capturing,
fishing, trapping, hunting, manufacturing, producing, processing or
assembling a good; and

third country means a non-Party.

Article 3.2: Origin Criteria

l. For purposes of this Agreement, a good imported into the territory of
a Party shall be deemed to be originating and eligible for preferential tariff
treatment if it conforms to the origin requirements under any one of the
following:

(a) a good which is wholly obtained or produced in the territory of
the exporting Party as set out and defined in Article 3.3;

(b) a good which is produced in the territory of the exporting Party
exclusively from originating materials; or
(c) a good which is produced in the territory of the exporting Party
using non-originating materials, provided that the good satisfies
the applicable requirements set out in Annex 3-A.
2. Except as provided for in Article 3.6, the conditions for acquiring

originating status set out in this Chapter must be fulfilled without interruption
in the territory of the exporting Party.

Article 3.3: Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

Within the meaning of Article 3.2.1(a), the following shall be considered to be
wholly obtained or produced in the territory of a Party:

(a)

(b)
(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

plants and plant products harvested, picked or gathered after
being grown there;

live animals born and raised there;

goods obtained from live animals referred to in subparagraph

(b);

goods obtained from hunting, trapping, fishing, aquaculture,
gathering or capturing conducted there;

minerals and other naturally occurring substances, not included
in subparagraphs (a) through (d), extracted or taken from its
soil, waters, seabed or beneath its seabed;

fish, shellfish, and other marine life taken by vessels registered
with the Party and entitled to fly its flag, and other products
taken by the Party or a person of that Party, from the waters,
seabed or beneath the seabed outside the territorial waters of
the Party, provided that the Party has the rights to exploit’ the
natural resources of such waters, seabed and beneath the seabed
under international law;

' For purposes of determining the origin of fish, shellfish, and other marine life, “rights to
exploit” in Article 3.3(f) include those rights of access to the fisheries resources of a coastal
state, as accruing from any agreements or arrangements between a Party and the coastal state
at the level of governments or duly authorised private entities.

(g) fish, shellfish, and other marine life taken from the high seas by
vessels registered with the Party and entitled to fly its flag;

(h) goods produced or made on board factory ships registered with
a Party and entitled to fly its flag, exclusively from products
referred to in subparagraph (f) or (g);

(i) goods taken from outer space provided that they are obtained
by the Party or a person of that Party;

(j) goods which are:

(1) waste and scrap derived from _ production § or
consumption there, provided that such goods are fit only
for disposal, for the recovery of raw materials, or for
recycling purposes; or

(ii) | used goods collected there, provided that such goods are
fit only for disposal, for the recovery of raw materials,

or for recycling purposes; and

(k) goods obtained or produced in the territory of the Party solely
from goods referred to in subparagraphs (a) through (j).
Article 3.4: Calculation of Regional Value Content
The regional value content (hereinafter referred to as “RVC”) of a good,
specified in Annex 3-A, shall be calculated by using either of the following
formulas:

(a) Direct/Build-Up Method

VOM + Direct + Direct + Profit + Other costs

labor Overhead
Cost Cost
RV C=---------------------------------------------2---------------------- x 100%
FOB
Where:
(1) VOM is the value of originating materials, parts or

goods that are acquired or self-produced by the producer
in the production of the good;

3-4

(11) direct labour cost includes wages, remuneration and
other employee benefits;

(i411) direct overhead cost is the total overhead expense; and

(iv) other costs are the costs incurred in placing the good in
the ship or other means of transport for export including,
but not limited to, domestic transport costs, storage and
warehousing, port handling, brokerage fees and service
charges.

or
(b) Indirect/Build-Down Method

FOB - VNM
RVC = wnnnnnnnnn anne nnn n nn eee ee x 100%
FOB

VNM means value of non-originating materials, which shall be:

(1) the CIF value at the time of importation of the materials,
parts or goods; or

(11) the earliest ascertained price paid for the materials, parts
or goods of undetermined origin in the territory of the
Party where the working or processing has taken place.

Article 3.5: Treatment for Certain Goods

Notwithstanding Article 3.2, certain goods shall be considered to be
originating even if the production process or operation has been undertaken in
the Gaeseong Industrial Complex located in the Korean Peninsula, on
materials exported from a Party and subsequently re-imported to that Party
provided that the conditions set out in Annex 3-B are fulfilled.

Article 3.6: Accumulation

I. Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, a good originating in the
territory of a Party, which is used in the territory of the other Party as material
for a finished good eligible for preferential tariff treatment, shall be considered
to be originating in the territory of the latter Party where working or
processing of the finished good has taken place.

3-5

2. The Parties may agree to review this Article with a view to extending
the application of the accumulation set out in paragraph 1 for purposes of
qualifying goods as originating goods under this Agreement.

Article 3.7: Non-Qualifying Operations

1. Notwithstanding any provisions in this Chapter, a good shall not be
considered to be originating in the territory of a Party if the following
operations are undertaken exclusively by itself or in combination in the

territory of that Party:

(a) preserving operations to ensure that the good remains in good
condition during transport and storage;

(b) changes of packaging, breaking-up and assembly of packages;

(c) simple” washing, cleaning, removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or
other coverings;

(d) ironing or pressing of textiles;

(e) simple painting and polishing operations;

(f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing and glazing of
cereals and rice;

(g) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps;

(h) simple peeling, stoning, or un-shelling;

(1) sharpening, simple grinding, or simple cutting;

(j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, or matching;

(k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing
on cards or boards and all other simple packaging operations;

(1) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like

distinguishing signs on products or their packaging;

* For purposes of this Article, “simple” generally describes an activity which does not need
special skills, or machines, apparatus, or equipment especially produced or installed for
carrying out the activity.

(m) simple mixing? of products, whether or not of different kinds;

(n) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete
article or disassembly of products into parts;

(0) simple testing or calibrations; or
(p) slaughtering of animals’.

2. A good originating in the territory of a Party shall retain its initial
originating status, when exported from the other Party, where operations
undertaken have not gone beyond those referred to in paragraph 1.

Article 3.8: Materials Used in Production

If a non-originating material undergoes further production such that it satisfies
the requirement of this Chapter, the material shall be treated as originating
when determining the originating status of the subsequently produced good,
regardless of whether that material was produced by the producer of the good.

Article 3.9: Direct Consignment

1. Preferential tariff treatment shall be applied to a good satisfying the
requirements of this Chapter and which is transported directly between the
territories of the exporting Party and the importing Party.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a good of which transport involves
transit through one or more intermediate third countries, other than the
territories of the exporting Party and the importing Party, shall be considered
to be consigned directly, provided that:

(a) the good remains under the control of the customs
administrations in the intermediate countries; and

> For purposes of this Article, “simple mixing” generally describes an activity which does not
need special skills, or machines, apparatus, or equipment especially produced or installed for
carrying out the activity. However, simple mixing does not include chemical reaction.
Chemical reaction means a process (including a biochemical process) which result in a
molecule with a new structure by breaking intramolecular bonds and by forming new
intramolecular bonds, or by altering the spatial arrangement of atoms in a molecule.

* “Slaughtering” means the mere killing of animals and subsequent processes such as cutting,
chilling, freezing, salting, drying or smoking, for purposes of preservation for storage and
transport.

(b) the good has not undergone any operation other than unloading
and reloading, storing, or any operation required to keep it in
good condition.

Article 3.10: De Minimis

l. A good that does not undergo a change in tariff classification shall be
considered as originating if:

(a) for a good, other than that provided for in Chapters 50 through
63 of the Harmonised System, the value of all non-originating
materials used in its production that do not undergo the
required change in tariff classification does not exceed 10
percent of the FOB value of the good;

(b) for a good provided for in Chapters 50 through 63 of the
Harmonised System, the weight of all non-originating materials
used in its production that do not undergo the required change
in tariff classification does not exceed 10 percent of the total
weight of the good;

and the good specified in subparagraphs (a) and (b) meets all other applicable
criteria set forth in this Chapter for qualifying as an originating good.

2. The value of non-originating materials referred to in paragraph 1 shall,
however, be included in the value of non-originating materials for any
applicable RVC requirement for the good.

Article 3.11: Treatment of Packaging and Packing Materials

1. Packing materials and containers for the transportation and shipment
of a good shall not be taken into account in determining the originating status
of any good.

2. Packing materials and containers in which a good is packaged for

retail sale, which are classified together with the good, shall not be taken into
account in determining the originating status of the good, provided that:

(a) the good is wholly obtained or produced in a Party in
accordance with Article 3.2.1(a);

(b) the good is produced in a Party exclusively from originating
materials, in accordance with Article 3.2.1(b); or

3-8

(c) the good is subject to a change in tariff classification or a
specific manufacturing or processing operation requirement
provided in Annex 3-A.

3. If a good is subject to the RVC requirement, the value of the
packaging materials and containers in which the good is packaged for retail
sale shall be taken into account as originating materials or non-originating
materials of the good, as the case may be, in calculating the RVC of the good.

Article 3.12: Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools

1. For purposes of determining the originating status of a good,
accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other information materials
presented with the good shall be considered as part of the good and shall be
disregarded in determining whether all the non-originating materials used in
the production of the good have undergone the applicable change in tariff
classification or a specific manufacturing or processing operation set out in
Annex 3-A, provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, or tools, and instructional or other
information materials presented with the good are not invoiced
separately from the good; and

(b) the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts, tools,
and instructional or other information materials presented with
the good are customary for the good.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if a good is subject to a RVC criterion
as set out in Annex 3-A, the value of the accessories, spare parts, tools, and
instructional or other information materials presented with the good shall be
taken into account as originating or non-originating materials as the case may
be, in calculating the RVC of the good, provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, or tools, and instructional or other
information materials presented with the good are not
invoiced separately from the good; and

(b) the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts, tools,

and instructional or other information materials presented
with the good are customary for the good.

Article 3.13: Neutral Elements

In order to determine whether a good originates, it shall not be necessary to
determine the origin of the following which might be used in its production
and not incorporated into the good:

(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)
(h)

fuel and energy;
tools, dies and moulds;

Spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of
equipment and buildings;

lubricants, greases, compounding materials and _ other
materials used in production or used to operate equipment and
buildings;

gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and
supplies;

equipment, devices and supplies used for testing or inspecting
the good;

catalysts and solvents; and
any other goods that are not incorporated into the good but of

which use in the production of the good can reasonably be
demonstrated to be a part of that production.

Article 3.14: Fungible Goods or Materials

The determination of whether fungible goods or materials are originating shall
be made either by physical segregation of each of the fungible goods or
materials or, where commingled, by the use of an inventory management
method which is recognised in the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
of the exporting Party, and should be used throughout the fiscal year.

Section B: Operational Certification Procedures

Article 3.15: Proof of Origin
1. Any of the following shall be considered as a Proof of Origin:

(a) a Certificate of Origin issued by an issuing body in
accordance with Article 3.16; or

(b) a Declaration of Origin by an approved exporter in
accordance with Article 3.17.

2. A Proof of Origin shall:

(a) be in writing, or any other medium, including electronic
format as notified by an importing Party;

(b) specify that the good is originating and meets the
requirements of this Chapter; and

(c) contain information which meets the minimum information
requirements as set out in Annex 3-C.

3. Each Party shall provide that a Proof of Origin remains valid for one
year from the date on which it is issued or completed.

Article 3.16: Certificate of Origin

1. A Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the issuing body of an
exporting Party upon an application by an exporter, a producer, or their
authorised representative.

2. The exporter, producer, or their authorised representative shall apply
in writing or by electronic means for a Certificate of Origin, to the issuing
body of the exporting Party in accordance with the exporting Party’s laws,
regulations, and procedures.

3. A Certificate of Origin shall:
(a) be in the format set out in Annex 3-D;
(b) bear a unique Certificate of Origin number;

(c) be in the English language; and

(d) bear an authorised signature and official seal of the issuing
body of the exporting Party. The signature and seal shall be
applied manually or electronically.

4. A Certificate of Origin may:
(a) indicate two or more invoices issued for a single shipment;
or
(b) contain multiple goods, provided that each good qualifies as

an originating good separately in its own right.

5. In circumstances where a Certificate of Origin contains incorrect
information, the issuing body of the exporting Party may:

(a) issue a new Certificate of Origin and invalidate the original
Certificate of Origin; or

(b) make modifications to the original Certificate of Origin by
striking out errors and making any additions or corrections.
Any changes shall be certified by the authorised signature
and official seal of the issuing body of the exporting Party.

6. Each Party shall provide the names, specimen signatures” , addresses,
and impressions of official seals of its issuing body to the other Party. Any
subsequent changes shall be promptly notified. The Parties shall endeavour to
establish a secured website to display such information from the last three
years, and such website shall be accessible to the Parties.

7. A Certificate of Origin shall be issued prior to or at the time of
shipment, or within seven calendar days° after the date of shipment. In
exceptional cases where a Certificate of Origin has not been issued prior to or
at the time of shipment, or within seven calendar days after shipment due to
involuntary errors, omissions, or other valid causes, or in the circumstances
referred to in subparagraph S(a), a Certificate of Origin may be issued
retrospectively but no later than one year after the date of shipment. In that
case, the Certificate of Origin shall bear the words “ISSUED
RETROACTIVELY”.

> The requirement to circulate the specimen signatures is not necessary when the issuing
authority has established the website containing relevant information of Certificate of Origin
that the importing Party can access.

° For greater certainty, “seven calendar days” shall include the date of shipment itself.

3-12

8. In the event of theft, loss, or destruction of an original Certificate of
Origin, the exporter, producer, or their authorised representative may apply in
writing to the issuing body of the exporting Party for a certified true copy of
the original Certificate of Origin. The copy shall:

(a) be issued no later than one year after the date of issuance of
the original Certificate of Origin;

(b) be based on the application for the original Certificate of
Origin;

(c) contain the same Certificate of Origin number and date as the
original Certificate of Origin; and

(d) be endorsed with the words “CERTIFIED TRUE COPY”.

Article 3.17: Declaration of Origin

1. A Declaration of Origin referred to in Article 3.15.1(b) may be
completed by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 3.19.

2. A Declaration of Origin shall:
(a) be completed in accordance with Annex 3-C;

(b) be in the English language;

(c) bear the name and signature of the certifying person; and
(d) bear the date on which the Declaration of Origin was
completed.

Article 3.18: Third-Party Invoicing

An importing Party shall not deny a claim for preferential tariff treatment for
the sole reason that an invoice was not issued by the exporter or producer of a
good provided that the good meets the requirements in this Chapter.

Article 3.19: Approved Exporter
l. Each Party shall provide for the authorisation of an exporter who

exports goods under this Agreement as an approved exporter, in accordance
with its laws and regulations. An exporter seeking such authorisation must

apply in writing or electronically and must offer to the satisfaction of the
competent authority of the exporting Party all guarantees necessary to verify
the originating status of the good for which a Declaration of Origin is
completed. The competent authority of an exporting Party may grant the status
of approved exporter subject to any conditions which it considers appropriate,
including the following:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

that the exporter is duly registered in accordance with the
laws and regulations of the exporting Party;

that the exporter knows and understands the rules of origin as
set out in this Chapter;

that the exporter has a satisfactory level of experience in
export in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
exporting Party;

that the exporter has a record of good compliance, measured
by risk management of the competent authority of the
exporting Party;

that the exporter, in the case of a trader, is able to obtain a
declaration by the producer confirming the originating status
of the good for which the Declaration of Origin is completed
by an approved exporter and the readiness of the producer to
cooperate in verification in accordance with Article 3.22
and meet all requirements of this Chapter; and

that the exporter has a well-maintained bookkeeping and
record-keeping system, in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the exporting Party.

2. The competent authority of an exporting Party shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

make its approved exporter procedures and requirements
public and easily available;

grant the approved exporter authorisation in writing or
electronically;

provide the approved exporter an authorisation code which
must be included in the Declaration of Origin; and

(d) exchange information’ of the Parties’ approved exporters
with the other Party through a secured website or any
electronic means in relation to the authorisation granted.

3. Notwithstanding subparagraph 2(d), a Party shall not be required to
provide the information referred to in that subparagraph to the other Party if it
has established its own secured website, containing the above information, that
is accessible to the other Party.

4. An approved exporter shall have the following obligations:

(a) to allow the competent authority of an exporting Party access
to records and premises for the purposes of monitoring the
use of authorisation, in accordance with Article 3.25;

(b) to complete Declarations of Origin only for goods for which
the approved exporter has been allowed to do so by the
competent authority of an exporting Party and for which it
has all appropriate documents proving the originating status
of the goods concerned at the time of completing the
declaration;

(c) to take full responsibility for all Declarations of Origin
completed, including any misuse; and

(d) to promptly inform the competent authority of an exporting
Party of any changes related to the information referred to in
subparagraph (b).
5. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall monitor the use

of the authorisation, including verification of the Declarations of Origin by an
approved exporter, and withdraw the authorisation where the conditions
referred to in paragraph | are not met.

6. An approved exporter shall be prepared to submit at any time, on
request of the customs administration of the importing Party, all appropriate
documents proving the originating status of the goods concerned, including
statements from the suppliers or producers in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the importing Party as well as the fulfilment of the other
requirements of this Chapter.

’ The information includes the legal name and address of the exporter, the approved exporter
authorisation code, the issuance date and, if applicable, the expiry date of its approved
exporter authorisation, and a list of goods subject to the authorisation, at least at the HS
Chapter level.

3-15

Article 3.20: Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment

1. An importing Party shall grant preferential tariff treatment in
accordance with this Agreement to an originating good on the basis of a Proof
of Origin.

2. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, an importing Party shall
provide that, for the purposes of claiming preferential tariff treatment, the
importer shall:

(a) make a declaration in its customs declaration that the good
qualifies as an originating good;

(b) have a valid Proof of Origin in its possession at the time the
declaration referred to in subparagraph (a) is made; and

(c) provide an original or a certified true copy of the Proof of
Origin to the importing Party if required by the importing
Party.
3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, the importing Party shall not

require a Proof of Origin if:

(a) the customs value of the importation does not exceed
US$ 200 or the equivalent amount in the importing Party’s
currency or any higher amount as the importing Party may
establish; or

(b) it is a good for which the importing Party has waived the
requirement,

provided that the importation does not form part of a series of
importations carried out or planned for the purpose of evading
compliance with the importing Party’s laws and regulations governing
claims for preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement.

4. The customs administration of the importing Party may require,
where appropriate, the importer to submit supporting evidence that a good
qualifies as an originating good, in accordance with the requirements of this
Chapter.

5. The importer shall demonstrate that the requirements referred to in
Article 3.9 have been met and provide such evidence on request of the
customs administration of the importing Party.

6. Where a Proof of Origin is submitted to the customs administration of
an importing Party after the expiration of the period of time for its submission,
such Proof of Origin may still be accepted, subject to the importing Party’s
laws, regulations, or administrative practices, when failure to observe the
period of time results from force majeure or other valid causes beyond the
control of the importer or exporter.

Article 3.21: Post-Importation Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment

1. Each Party, subject to its laws and regulations, shall provide that
where a good would have qualified as an originating good when it was
imported into that Party, the importer of the good may, within a period
specified by its laws and regulations, and after the date on which the good was
imported, apply for a refund of any excess duties, deposit, or guarantee paid as
the result of the good not having been granted preferential tariff treatment, on
presentation of the following to the customs administration of that Party:

(a) a Proof of Origin and other evidence that the good qualifies
as an originating good; and

(b) such other documentation in relation to the importation as the
customs administration may require to satisfactorily evidence
the preferential tariff treatment claimed.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, each Party may require, in accordance
with its laws and regulations, that the importer notify the customs
administration of that Party of its intention to claim preferential tariff
treatment at the time of importation.

Article 3.22: Verification

1. For purposes of determining whether a good imported into a Party
from the other Party qualifies as an originating good under this Chapter, the
competent authority of the importing Party may conduct a verification process
by means of:

(a) a written request for additional information from the
importer;

(b) a written request for additional information from the exporter
or producer;

(c) a written request that the competent authority of the

exporting Party assists in verifying the origin of the good

(d)

(e)

within the competence and available resources of the
exporting Party;

a verification visit to the premises of the exporter or producer
in the exporting Party to observe the facilities and the
production processes of the good and to review the records
referring to the origin, including accounting files;® or

any other procedures to which the Parties may agree.

2. The importing Party shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

for purposes of subparagraph 1(b), send a written request
with a copy of the Proof of Origin and the reasons for the
request to the exporter or producer of the good;

for purposes of subparagraph l(c), send a written request
with a copy of the Proof of Origin and the reasons for the
request to the competent authority of the exporting Party; and

for purposes of subparagraph 1(d), request the written
consent of the exporter or producer whose premises are
going to be visited, and the competent authority of the
exporting Party and state the proposed date and location for
the visit and its specific purpose.

3. On request of the importing Party, a verification visit to the premises
of the exporter or producer may be conducted with the consent and assistance
of the exporting Party, according to the procedures agreed between the
importing Party and exporting Party.

4. For a verification under subparagraphs 1(a) through (d), the importing
Party shall:
(a) allow the importer, exporter, producer, or the issuing body or

(b)

competent authority of the exporting Party between 30 and
90 days from the date of receipt of the written request for
information under subparagraphs 1(a) through (c) to respond;

allow the exporter, producer, or the competent authority to
consent or refuse the request within 30 days from the date of
its receipt of the written request for a verification visit under
subparagraph 1(d); and

* A verification visit under this subparagraph shall only be undertaken after a verification
process in accordance with subparagraph (c) has been conducted.

(c) make a determination following a verification within 90 days
from the date of its receipt of the information necessary to
make the determination.

5. For purposes of paragraph 1, the importing Party shall provide a
written notification of the result of verification with the reasons for that result
to the importer, exporter, or producer of the good, or the competent authority
of the exporting Party that received the verification request.

6. The customs administration of the importing Party may suspend the
application of preferential tariff treatment while waiting for the result of
verification. The importing Party shall permit the release of the good, but may
require that such release be subject to lodgement of a security in accordance
with its laws and regulations.

Article 3.23: Denial of Preferential Tariff Treatment

1. The customs administration of the importing Party may deny
preferential tariff treatment where:

(a) the good does not meet the requirements of this Chapter; or

(b) the importer, exporter, or producer of the good fails or has
failed to comply with any of the relevant requirements of this
Chapter for obtaining preferential tariff treatment.

2. If the customs administration of the importing Party denies a claim
for preferential tariff treatment, it shall provide the decision in writing to the
importer that includes the reasons for the decision.

3. The customs administration of the importing Party may determine
that a good does not qualify as an originating good and may deny preferential
tariff treatment where:

(a) the customs administration of the importing Party has not
received sufficient information to determine that the good is
originating;

(b) the exporter, producer, or the competent authority of the
exporting Party fails to respond to a written request for
information in accordance with Article 3.22; or

(c) the request for a verification visit in accordance with Article
3.22 is refused.

Article 3.24: Minor Discrepancies or Errors

The customs administration of an importing Party shall disregard minor
discrepancies or errors, such as slight discrepancies between documents,
omissions of information, typing errors, or protrusions from the designated
field, provided that these minor discrepancies or errors do not create doubt as
to the originating status of the good.

Article 3.25: Record-Keeping Requirement
1. Each Party shall require that:

(a) its exporters, producers, issuing bodies, or competent
authorities retain, for at least a period of five years from the
date of issuance of the Proof of Origin, or a longer period in
accordance with its relevant laws and regulations, all records
necessary to prove that the good for which the Proof of
Origin was issued was originating; and

(b) its importers retain, for at least a period of five years from
the date of importation of the good, or a longer period in
accordance with its relevant laws and regulations, all records
necessary to prove that the good for which preferential tariff
treatment was claimed was originating.

2. The records referred to in paragraph 1 may be maintained in any
medium that allows for prompt retrieval, including in digital, electronic,
optical, magnetic, or written form, in accordance with the Party’s laws and
regulations.

Article 3.26: Consultations

The Parties shall consult when necessary to ensure that this Chapter is
administered effectively, uniformly, and consistently in order to achieve the
spirit and objectives of this Agreement.

Article 3.27: Electronic Origin Data Exchange System

The Parties may develop an Electronic Origin Data Exchange System to

ensure the effective and efficient implementation of this Chapter in a manner
jointly determined by the Parties.

Article 3.28: Transitional Provisions for Goods in Transit

A Party shall grant preferential tariff treatment to an originating good that, on
the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party:

(a) was being transported to that Party in accordance with
Article 3.9; or

(b) had not been imported into that Party,

if a valid claim under Article 3.20 for preferential tariff treatment is made
within 180 days of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party,
subject to the submission to the customs administration of the importing Party
of a Proof of Origin made out retrospectively, together with the documents
showing that the goods have been transported directly in accordance with
Article 3.9.

Article 3.29: Penalties

Each Party shall adopt or maintain appropriate penalties or other measures
against violations of its laws and regulations relating to this Chapter.

Article 3.30: Communication Language

Communications between the importing Party and the exporting Party shall be
conducted in the English language.

Article 3.31: Contact Points

Each Party shall, within 30 days from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement, designate one or more contact points for the implementation of
this Chapter and notify the other Party of the contact details of that contact
point or those contact points. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party
of any change to those contact details.

Article 3.32: Supporting Documents of Direct Consignment

For purposes of implementing Article 3.9, where transportation is effected
through the territory of one or more intermediate countries, other than that of
both Parties, the following shall be produced to the relevant government
authorities of the importing Party:

(a)

(b)

a through Bill of Lading issued in the territory of the
exporting Party, which includes a combination of any
transport documents covering the entire transport route of a
good from the exporting Party to the importing Party; or

other relevant supporting documents, if any, as evidence that
the requirements of Article 3.9 are being complied with.

CHAPTER FOUR

CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TRADE FACILITATION

Article 4.1: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

customs procedure means the measures applied by the
customs administration to goods and to the means of
transport that are subject to its customs laws and regulations;
and

means of transport means various types of vessels, vehicles,
and aircrafts which enter or leave the customs territory of a
Party carrying natural persons, goods, or articles.

Article 4.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

ensure predictability, consistency, and transparency in the
application of customs laws and regulations of the Parties;

promote efficient administration of customs procedures of
the Parties, and the expeditious clearance of goods;

simplify customs procedures of the Parties and harmonise
them to the extent possible with relevant international
standards;

promote cooperation between the customs administrations;
and

facilitate trade between the Parties, including through a
strengthened environment for global and regional supply
chains.

Article 4.3: Scope

This Chapter shall apply to customs procedures applied to goods traded
between the Parties and to the means of transport which enter or leave the
customs territory of each Party.

4-]

Article 4.4: Consistency

1. Each Party shall ensure that its customs laws and regulations are
consistently implemented and applied throughout its customs territory.

2. In fulfilling the obligation in paragraph 1, each Party shall endeavour to
adopt or maintain administrative measures to ensure consistent
implementation and application of its customs laws and regulations throughout
its customs territory, preferably by establishing an administrative mechanism
which assures consistent application of the customs laws and regulations of
that Party among its regional customs offices.

Article 4.5: Transparency

1. Each Party shall promptly publish, on the internet to the extent
possible, the following information in a non-discriminatory and easily
accessible manner in order to enable governments, traders, and other interested
persons to become acquainted with them:

(a) procedures for importation, exportation, and transit (including
port, airport, and other entry-point procedures), and required
forms and documents;

(b) applied rates of duties and taxes of any kind imposed on or in
connection with importation or exportation;

(c) fees and charges imposed by or for governmental agencies on
or in connection with importation, exportation, or transit;

(d) rules for the classification or valuation of products for
customs purposes;

(e) laws, regulations, and administrative rulings of general
application relating to rules of origin;

(f) import, export, or transit restrictions or prohibitions;
(g) penalty provisions for breaches of import, export, or transit
formalities;

(h) procedures for appeal or review;

4-2

(1) agreements to which it is party, or parts thereof with
any country or countries relating to importation,
exportation, or transit; and

(j) procedures relating to the administration of tariff
quotas.
2. In particular, each Party shall make available, and update to the extent

possible and as appropriate, the following through the internet:

(a)

(b)

(c)

a description’ of its procedures for importation, exportation,
and transit, including procedures for appeal or review, that
informs governments, traders, and other interested persons of
the practical steps needed for importation, exportation, and
transit;

the forms and documents required for importation into,
exportation from, or transit through the territory of that Party;
and

contact information for the inquiry points as well as
information on how to make inquiry on customs matters as
provided for in Article 4.6.

3. To the extent possible, when developing new, or amending existing,
customs laws and regulations, each Party shall publish, or otherwise make
readily available such proposed new or amended customs laws and regulations
and provide a reasonable opportunity for interested persons to comment on the
proposed customs laws and regulations, unless such advance notice is

precluded.

Article 4.6: Inquiry Points

Each customs administration shall designate one or more inquiry points to
answer reasonable inquiry of interested persons concerning customs matters
and to facilitate access to forms and documents required for importation,
exportation, and transit.

Article 4.7: Customs Procedures

' Each Party has the discretion to state on its website the legal limitations of this description.

4-3

1. Each customs administration shall ensure that its customs procedures
and practices are predictable, consistent, and transparent, and facilitate trade,
including through the expeditious clearance of goods.

2. Each customs administration shall ensure that its customs procedures,
where possible and to the extent permitted by its customs laws and regulations,
conform with the standards and recommended practices of the World Customs
Organization.

3. The customs administration shall review its customs procedures with
a view to simplifying such procedures to facilitate trade.

Article 4.8: Preshipment Inspection

1. Each Party shall not require the use of preshipment inspections in
relation to tariff classification and customs valuation.

2. Without prejudice to the rights of any Party to use other types of
preshipment inspection not covered by paragraph 1, each Party is encouraged
not to introduce or apply new requirements regarding their use.

3. Paragraph 2 refers to preshipment inspections covered by the
Agreement on Preshipment Inspection in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement,
and does not preclude preshipment inspections for sanitary and phytosanitary
purposes.

Article 4.9: Advance Rulings

1. Each Party shall, prior to the importation of a good from a Party into
its territory, issue a written advance ruling to an importer, exporter, or any
person with a justifiable cause, or a representative thereof, who has submitted
a written request containing all necessary information, with regard to:

(a) tariff classification;

(b) whether the good is an originating good in accordance with
Chapter Three (Rules of Origin);

(c) the appropriate method or criteria, and the application thereof,
to be used for determining the customs value under a
particular set of facts, in accordance with the Customs

Valuation Agreement; and

(d) such other matters as the Parties may agree.

4-4

2. A Party may require that an applicant have legal representation or
registration in that Party. To the extent possible, such requirements shall not
restrict the categories of persons eligible to apply for advance rulings, with
particular consideration for the specific needs of small and medium enterprises.
These requirements shall be clear and transparent and not constitute a means
of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination™ °

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for issuing advance
rulings which:

(a) specify the information required to apply for an advance
ruling;

(b) provide that each Party may at any time during the course of
an evaluation of an application for an advance ruling, request
that the applicant provide additional information, which may
include a sample of the goods, necessary to evaluate the
application;

(c) ensure that an advance ruling is based on the facts and
circumstances presented by the applicant and any other
relevant information in the possession of the decision-maker;
and

(d) ensure that the advance ruling includes the relevant facts and
the basis for its decision.

4. Each Party shall issue an advance ruling within 90 days on receipt of
all necessary information.

5. A Party may decline to issue an advance ruling if the facts and
circumstances forming the basis of the advance ruling are the subject of
administrative or judicial review. A Party that declines to issue an advance
ruling shall promptly notify the applicant in writing, setting forth the relevant
facts, circumstances, and the basis for its decision to decline to issue the
advance ruling.

* On request of a Party, the Parties may review the requirements of this paragraph in terms of
their contribution towards the trade facilitation through the Committee on Rules of Origin and
Customs Procedures.

> Each Party shall ensure that its registration process is transparent, applications are

considered in a timely manner, and the decision made on an application, and the reasons for it,
are promptly advised to the applicant in writing.

4-5

6. A Party may reject a request for an advance ruling where the
additional information requested, in writing, in accordance with subparagraph
3(b) is not provided within a reasonable and specified period, which is
determined at the time of the request for additional information and the Party
requests the additional information from the applicant in writing.

7. Each Party shall establish a validity period for an advance ruling of
three years from the date of its issuance.

8. Where a Party revokes, modifies, or invalidates an advance ruling, it
shall promptly provide a written notice to the applicant setting out the relevant
facts and the basis for its decision, where:

(a) there is a change in its laws, regulations, or administrative
rules;
(b) incorrect information was provided or relevant information

was withheld;

(c) there is a change in a material fact or circumstances on which
the advance ruling was based; or

(d) the advance ruling was in error.

9. Where a Party revokes, modifies, or invalidates an advance ruling
with retroactive effect, it may only do so where the ruling was based on
incomplete, incorrect, false, or misleading information.

10. Each Party may make publicly available any information on advance
rulings which it considers to be of significant interest to other interested
parties, taking into account the need to protect commercially confidential
information.

Article 4.10: Release of Goods

1. The customs administration of each Party shall adopt or maintain
simplified customs procedures for the efficient release of goods in order to
facilitate trade between the Parties. This paragraph shall not require a Party to
release a good if its requirements for release have not been met.

2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures

that allow the goods to be cleared from customs within a period no longer than
that required to ensure compliance with its customs law.

4-6

3. For goods selected for further examination, such an examination shall
be limited to what is reasonable and necessary, and undertaken and completed
without undue delay.

4. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures allowing the release of
goods, prior to the final determination of customs duties, taxes, fees, and
charges if such determination is not done prior to, or upon arrival or as rapidly
as possible after arrival and provided that all other regulatory requirements
have been met. As a condition for such release, a Party may require a
guarantee in accordance with its laws and regulations that does not exceed the
amount the Party requires to ensure payment of customs duties, taxes, fees,
and charges ultimately due for the goods covered by the guarantee.

5. With a view to preventing avoidable loss or deterioration of
perishable goods, and provided that all regulatory requirements have been met,
each Party may provide for the release of perishable goods from customs
control:

(a) under normal circumstances in the shortest possible time; and

(b) in exceptional circumstances where it would be appropriate to
do so, outside the business hours of its customs administration.

6. Each Party may give appropriate priority to perishable goods when
scheduling any examinations that may be required.

7. Each Party may either arrange or allow an importer to arrange for the
proper storage of perishable goods pending their release. Each Party may
require that any storage facilities arranged by the importer have been approved
or designated by its relevant authorities. The movement of the goods to those
storage facilities, including authorisations for the operator moving the goods,
may be subject to the approval, where required, of the relevant authorities.
Each Party may, where practicable and consistent with domestic legislation,
on the request of the importer, provide for any procedures necessary for
release to take place at those storage facilities.

Article 4.11: Risk Management

l. Each Party shall adopt or maintain a risk management approach and
techniques for customs control.

2. Each Party shall design and apply risk management in a manner so as

to avoid arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination, or disguised restrictions on
international trade.

4-7

3. Each Party shall concentrate customs control and, to the extent
possible other relevant border controls, on high risk consignments and
expedite the release of low risk consignments. Each Party may also select, on a
random basis, consignments for such controls as part of its risk management.

4. Each Party shall base risk management on the risk assessment
through appropriate selectivity criteria. Such selectivity criteria may include,
inter alia, HS code, nature and description of the goods, country of origin,
country from which the goods were shipped, value of the goods, compliance
record of traders, and type of means of transport.

5. The customs administration of each Party shall exchange best
practices on risk management techniques.

Article 4.12: Post-clearance Audit

1. With a view to expediting the release of goods, each Party shall adopt
or maintain post-clearance audit to ensure compliance with its customs and
other related laws and regulations.

2. Each Party shall select a person or a consignment for post-clearance
audit in a risk-based manner, which may include appropriate selectivity criteria.
Each Party shall conduct post-clearance audits in a transparent manner.
Where the person is involved in the audit process and conclusive results have
been achieved, the Party shall, without delay, notify the person whose record
was audited of the:

(a) results;
(b) reasons for the results; and
(c) person’s rights and obligations.
3. The Parties acknowledge that the information obtained in post-

clearance audit may be used in further administrative or judicial proceedings.
4. Each Party shall, wherever practicable, use the result of post-
clearance audit in applying risk management.

Article 4.13: Time Release Studies

l. Each Party is encouraged to measure the time required for the release

of goods by its customs administration periodically and in a consistent manner,
and to publish the findings thereof, using tools such as the Guide to Measure

the Time Required for the Release of Goods issued by the World Customs
Organization with a view to:

(a) assessing its trade facilitation measures; and

(b) considering opportunities for further improvement of the
time required for the release of goods.

2. Each Party is encouraged to share its experiences in the time release
studies referred to in paragraph 1, including methodologies used and
bottlenecks identified.

Article 4.14: Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall provide that any person to whom its customs
administration issues an administrative decision* has the right, within its
territory, to:

(a) an administrative appeal to or review by an administrative
authority higher than or independent of the official or office
that issued the decision; and

(b) a judicial appeal or review of the decision.

2. Each Party shall allow an exporter or producer to provide information
directly to the Party conducting the review and to request that Party to treat
that information as confidential in accordance with Article 4.15.

Article 4.15: Confidentiality

Where a Party provides information to the other Party and designates the
information as confidential, the Party receiving the information shall maintain
the confidentiality of the information, in accordance with its laws and
regulations.

* For purposes of this Article, “administrative decision” means a decision with a legal effect
that affects the rights and obligations of a specific person in an individual case. It shall be
understood that an administrative decision referred to in this Article covers an administrative
action within the meaning of Article X of GATT 1994 or failure to take an administrative
action or decision as provided for in a Party’s laws and regulations and legal system. For
addressing such failure, a Party may maintain an alternative administrative mechanism or
judicial recourse to direct the customs administration to promptly issue an administrative
decision in place of the right to appeal or review under subparagraph 1(a).

4-9

Article 4.16: Customs Cooperation

1. The customs administration of both Parties may, as deemed
appropriate, assist each other, in relation to:

(a) the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

(b) developing and implementing customs best practice and risk
management techniques;

(c) simplifying and harmonising customs procedures;
(d) advancing technical skills and the use of technology;
(e) application of the WTO Customs Valuation Agreement;

(f) exchanging FTA implementation statistics, formats and types
of which are to be mutually agreed by both Parties; and

(g) such other customs issues as the Parties may mutually
determine.
2. The customs administration of both Parties may, as deemed

appropriate, share information and experiences on development of customs
administration.

3. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, provide the other Party with
timely notice of any significant administrative change, modification of laws or
regulations, or similar measures related to its laws or regulations that govern
importations or exportations, that is likely to substantially affect the operation
of this Chapter. The notice can be made in the English language or the Party’s
language and will be provided to the contact point designated pursuant to
Article 4.17.

Article 4.17: Consultation and Contact Points

l. The customs administration of each Party may at any time request
consultations with the customs administration of the other Party on any
significant matter arising from the implementation or operation of this Chapter,
in cases where there are reasonable grounds or truth provided by the
requesting Party.

2. In the event that such consultations fail to resolve any such matter, the
requesting Party may refer the matter to the Committee on Rules of Origin and
Customs Procedures referred to in Article 4.18 for further consideration.

3. Each customs administration shall designate one or more contact
points for purposes of this Chapter. Information on the contact points shall be
provided to the other Party and any amendment of the said information shall
be notified promptly.

Article 4.18: Committee on Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Rules of Origin and
Customs Procedures (hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”) composed of
representatives’ designated by each Party.

2. The Committee shall ensure the proper functioning of this Chapter and
Chapter Three (Rules of Origin) and examine all the issues arising from the
application of these Chapters.

3. The functions of the Committee may include:

(a) reviewing, discussing, proposing and making appropriate
recommendations to the Joint Committee, as necessary, on:

(1) the effective, uniform and consistent administration
of this Chapter and Chapter Three (Rules of Origin);
including their interpretations and applications, and
the enhancement of cooperation in relation to these
Chapters; and

(11) revising Annex 3-A (Product Specific Rules) on the
basis of the transposition of the Harmonised System
(hereinafter referred to as the “HS”).

(b) consulting on and endeavouring to resolve any difference
that may arise between the Parties on matters related to the
classification of goods under the HS and interpretation of
this Chapter and Chapter Three (Rules of Origin);

(c) reviewing the possibility of revision and reaching agreement
on revision of this Chapter and Chapter Three (Rules of
Origin); and

(d) dealing with other matters referred to the Committee by the
Joint Committee.

> For Korea, the representative will be Korea’s customs administration. For Cambodia, there
shall be co-leads representing ROO and CPTF.

4. The Committee shall meet every year, or as otherwise agreed,
alternating between the Parties.

4-12

CHAPTER FIVE
TRADE REMEDIES

Section A: Safeguard Measures

Article 5.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Section:

domestic industry means, with respect to an imported good, the producers as
a whole of the like or directly competitive good operating in the territory of a
Party, or those producers whose collective output of the like or directly
competitive good constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic
production of that good;

safeguard measure means a measure described in Article 5.2;

serious injury means a significant overall impairment in the position of a
domestic industry;

threat of serious injury means serious injury that, on the basis of facts and
not merely on allegation, conjecture, or remote possibility, is clearly imminent;
and

transition period means, in relation to a particular good, the period from the
date of entry into force of this Agreement until three years after the date of
completion of tariff reduction or elimination in accordance with that Party’s
Schedule of tariff commitments in Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of
Customs Duties).

Article 5.2: Application of a Safeguard Measure

1. If, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under
this Agreement, an originating good of the other Party is being imported into
the territory of a Party in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or
relative to domestic production, and under such conditions so as to
substantially cause serious injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic
industry producing a like or directly competitive good, the Party may, to the
extent necessary to prevent or remedy the serious injury to its domestic
industry and to facilitate its domestic industry’s adjustment:

(a) suspend the further reduction of any rate of customs duty on the
good provided for under this Agreement; or

5-1

(b) increase the rate of customs duty on the good to a level not to
exceed the lesser of:

(i) the most-favoured-nation (MFN) applied rate of customs
duty on the good in effect at the time the safeguard measure
is taken; or

(ii) the base rate of customs duty specified in the Schedules
included in Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of
Customs Duties) pursuant to Article 2.4 (Reduction or
Elimination of Customs Duties).

2. The Parties understand that neither tariff rate quotas nor quantitative
restrictions are permissible forms of a safeguard measure.

Article 5.3: Conditions and Limitations

1. A Party shall notify the other Party in writing on initiation of an
investigation described in paragraph 2 and shall consult with the other Party as
far in advance as practicable prior to applying a safeguard measure, with a
view to reviewing the information arising from the investigation and
exchanging views on the safeguard measure.

2. A Party shall apply a safeguard measure only following an investigation
by the Party’s competent authorities in accordance with Articles 3 and 4.2(c)
of the Safeguards Agreement, and to this end, Articles 3 and 4.2(c) of the
Safeguards Agreement are incorporated into and made a part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

3. In the investigation described in paragraph 2, the Party shall comply
with the requirements of Article 4.2(a) of the Safeguards Agreement, and to
this end, Article 4.2(a) of the Safeguards Agreement is incorporated into and

made a part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

4. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities complete any such
investigation within one year of its date of initiation.

5. Neither Party shall apply a safeguard measure:

(a) except to the extent, and for such time, as may be necessary to
prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment;

(b) for a period exceeding two years, except that the period may be
extended by up to one year if the competent authorities of the

5-2

importing Party determine, in conformity with the procedures
specified in this Article, that the measure continues to be
necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate
adjustment and that there is evidence that the industry is adjusting,
provided that the total period of application of a safeguard
measure, including the period of initial application and any
extension thereof, shall not exceed three years; or

(c) beyond the expiration of the transition period.

6. A Party shall not apply a safeguard measure more than once on the same
good until a period of time equal to the duration of the previous safeguard
measure, including any extension, has elapsed commencing from the
termination of the previous safeguard measure, provided that the period of
non-application is at least two years.

7. Where the expected duration of the safeguard measure is over one year,
the importing Party shall progressively liberalise it at regular intervals.

8. | When a Party terminates a safeguard measure, the rate of customs duty
shall be the rate that, according to the Party’s Schedule in Annex 2-A
(Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties), would have been in effect but
for the safeguard measure.

Article 5.4: Provisional Safeguard Measures

1. In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage that would
be difficult to repair, a Party may apply a safeguard measure, which shall take
the form of the measures set out in Article 5.2.1(a) or 5.2.1(b), on a provisional
basis pursuant to a preliminary determination by its competent authorities that
there is clear evidence that imports of an originating good of the other Party
have increased as the result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty
under this Agreement, and such imports substantially cause serious injury or
threat of serious injury to the domestic industry.

2. Before a Party’s competent authorities may make a _ preliminary
determination, the Party shall in accordance with its domestic laws and
regulations publish a public notice in its official journal setting forth how
interested parties, including importers and exporters, may obtain a non-
confidential copy of the application requesting a provisional safeguard
measure, and shall to the extent practicable, provide interested parties
adequate opportunity after the date it publishes the notice to submit evidence
and views regarding the application of a provisional safeguard measure.

3. The applying Party shall notify the other Party before applying a

5-3

safeguard measure on a provisional basis, and shall initiate consultations
immediately after applying the provisional safeguard measure.

4. The duration of any provisional safeguard measure shall not exceed 200
days, during which time the Party shall comply with the requirements of
Articles 5.3.2 and 5.3.3.

5. The Party shall promptly refund any tariff increases if the investigation
described in Article 5.3.2 does not result in a finding that the requirements of
Article 5.2 are met. The duration of any provisional safeguard measure shall
be counted as part of the period described in Article 5.3.5(b).

Article 5.5: Compensation

1. Within 30 days after a Party applies a safeguard measure, the Party shall
afford an opportunity for the other Party to consult with it regarding adequate
means of trade compensation in the form of concessions having substantially
equivalent trade effects or equivalent to the value of the additional duties
expected to result from the safeguard measure. The applying Party shall
provide such compensation as the Parties mutually agree.

2. If the Parties are unable to agree on compensation through consultations
under paragraph 1 within 30 days after the consultations begin, the Party
against whose originating good the safeguard measure is applied may suspend
the application of concessions with respect to originating goods of the
applying Party that have trade effects substantially equivalent to the safeguard
measure.

3. The right of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall not be exercised
for the first two years during which the safeguard measure is in effect,
provided that the safeguard measure has been taken as a result of an absolute
increase in imports and that such a safeguard measure conforms to the
provisions of this Section.

4. The applying Party’s obligation to provide compensation under
paragraph 1 and the other Party’s right to suspend concessions under
paragraph 2 shall terminate on the date the safeguard measure terminates.

5. Any compensation shall be based on the total period of application of
the provisional safeguard measure and of the safeguard measure.

Article 5.6: Global Safeguard Measures

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT

5-4

1994 and the Safeguards Agreement. This Agreement does not confer any
additional rights or obligations on the Parties with regard to measures taken
under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement.

2. At the request of the other Party, the Party intending to take a global
safeguard measure shall provide immediately written notification of all
pertinent information on the initiation of a global safeguard investigation, the
preliminary determination and the final finding of the investigation.

3. Neither Party shall apply, with respect to the same good, at the same
time:

(a) a provisional safeguard measure or a safeguard measure; and

(b) a measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards
Agreement.

Section B: Anti-Dumping and Countervailing Duties

Article 5.7: General Provisions

1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, each Party retains
its rights and obligations under Article VI of GATT 1994, Anti-Dumping
Agreement and SCM Agreement with regard to the application of anti-
dumping and countervailing duties.

2. The Parties shall ensure as soon as possible, after any imposition of
provisional measures and in any case before the final determination, full and
meaningful disclosure of all essential facts and considerations which form the
basis for the decision to apply measures, without prejudice to Article 6.5 of the
Anti-Dumping Agreement and Article 12.4 of the SCM Agreement.
Disclosures shall be made in writing, and interested parties shall be allowed
sufficient time to make their comments.

3. The Parties shall observe the following practices in anti-dumping or
countervailing cases between them in order to enhance transparency in the
implementation of the WTO Agreement:

(a) when dumping margins are established, assessed, or reviewed
under Articles 2, 9.3, 9.5, and 11 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement
whether on the weighted-to-weighted basis, transaction-to-
transaction basis, or weighted-to-transaction basis under Article
2.4.2 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement, all individual margins,
whether positive or negative, should be counted toward the

5-5

average; and

(b) the investigating Party shall request an exporter or producer in the
territory of the other Party for the timely response to its
questionnaires. When the investigating Party finds major
deficiency in information in a questionnaire response from
relevant exporter or producer received before the deadline or
requires clarifications for the purposes of investigation, the
investigating Party shall demand missing information or request
clarification of information concerning the answers to the
questionnaires. This procedure shall not be used to cause
unwarranted delays in the investigation or to circumvent the
deadlines which are provided in the Party’s domestic laws and
regulations.

4. If a decision is taken to impose an anti-dumping duty pursuant to Article
9.1 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement, the Party taking such a decision, may
apply the ‘lesser duty’ rule, by imposing a duty which is less than the dumping
margin where such lesser duty would be adequate to remove the injury to the
domestic industry.

Article 5.8: Notification and Consultations

1. Upon receipt by a Party’s competent authorities of a properly
documented anti-dumping application with respect to imports from the other
Party, and no later than 15 days before initiating an investigation, the Party
shall provide written notification to the other Party of its receipt of the
application.

2. Upon receipt by a Party’s competent authorities of a properly
documented countervailing duty application with respect to imports from the
other Party, and before initiating an investigation, the Party shall, as
appropriate and in conformity with the procedural rules provided for in the
domestic laws and regulations of the Party, provide written notification to the
other Party of its receipt of the application and afford the other Party a meeting
to consult with its competent authorities regarding the application.

3. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under Annex II of the
Anti-Dumping Agreement and in particular its paragraph 5, and under Articles
12.7 and 12.8 of the SCM Agreement. In the event the investigating authorities
intend to make a determination on the basis of the facts available pursuant to
Article 6.8 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement and Article 12.7 of the SCM
Agreement, the investigating authorities shall endeavour to provide a reasoned
and adequate explanation of:

5-6

(a) indication of conditions under which the use of facts available is
applicable;

(b) the information which interested parties have failed to submit to
the investigating authorities; and

(c) the facts with which the investigating authorities decided to
replace the information referred to in subparagraph (b).

Article 5.9: Undertakings

1. After the importing Party’s competent authorities initiate an anti-
dumping or countervailing duty investigation, the importing Party shall
transmit to the exporting Party’s embassy located in the importing Party or the
exporting Party’s competent authorities written information regarding the
importing Party’s procedures for requesting its authorities to consider a price
undertaking, or an undertaking, including the time frames for offering and
concluding any such undertaking.

2. In an anti-dumping investigation, where the importing Party’s
authorities have made a preliminary affirmative determination of dumping and
injury caused by such dumping, the importing Party shall afford due
consideration, and adequate opportunity for consultations, to exporters of the
exporting Party regarding the proposed price undertaking which, if accepted,
may result in suspension of the investigation without imposition of anti-
dumping duties, through the means provided for in the importing Party’s
domestic laws, regulations, and procedures.

3. In a countervailing duty investigation, where the importing Party’s
authorities have made a preliminary affirmative determination of subsidisation
and injury caused by such subsidisation, the importing Party shall afford due
consideration, and adequate opportunity for consultations, to the exporting
Party and its exporters, regarding the proposed undertaking which, if accepted,
may result in suspension of the investigation without imposition of
countervailing duties, through the means provided for in the importing Party’s
domestic laws, regulations, and procedures.

Article 5.10: Investigation after Termination Resulting from a Review

A Party shall endeavour to examine with special care, any application for
initiation of an anti-dumping investigation on an originating good of the other
Party on which anti-dumping measures have been terminated in the previous
12 months as a result of a review. Unless this pre-initiation examination
indicates that the circumstances have changed, the investigation shall not

5-7

proceed.

Article 5.11: Cumulative Assessment

Without prejudice to Article 3.3 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement and Article
15.3 of the SCM Agreement, when imports from more than one country are
simultaneously subject to an anti-dumping or countervailing duty investigation,
a Party shall examine, with special care, whether the cumulative assessment of
the effect of the imports from the other Party is appropriate in light of the
conditions of competition between the imported goods and the conditions of
competition between the imported goods and the like domestic goods.

Article 5.12: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter Eight
(Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Section.

5-8

CHAPTER SIX
ECONOMIC COOPERATION

Article 6.1: Objectives

1. Recognising the importance of on-going economic and _ technical
cooperation initiatives, the Parties agree to complement their existing
economic partnership in the areas of mutual benefit and interest, taking into
account the different levels of development and capacity of the Parties.

2. The Parties agree that the economic and technical cooperation aims at
narrowing the development gap between the Parties and maximising mutual
benefits from the implementation and utilisation of this Agreement.

3. The Parties agree that the economic cooperation aims at addressing the
specific needs and requirements consistent with the priority areas under this
Agreement from implementing economic and technical cooperation activities,
including capacity building programs and technical assistance, particularly a
Work Programme.

4. The Parties acknowledge the need to strengthen and enhance economic,
trade and investment cooperation as provided for in this Agreement.

Article 6.2: Areas of Cooperation

1. Economic cooperation under this Chapter shall support the inclusive,
effective and efficient implementation and utilisation of this Agreement
through economic and technical cooperation activities which are trade or
investment related as specified in the Work Programme.

2. The Parties shall explore and undertake economic and _ technical
cooperation activities, including capacity building and technical assistance that
focus on the following:

(a) trade and investment promotion;

(b) agriculture, forestry and fisheries;

(c) electronic commerce;

(d) technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment
procedures;

(e) sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

6-1

(f) trade and investment-related legal framework;
(g) infrastructure development;

(h) industrial development;

(i) information and communication technology; and
(j) other matters, as agreed upon between the Parties.
3. Trade Promotion: the Parties shall cooperate in promoting trade and

investment activities through government agencies or other bodies. Such
cooperation may include, but is not limited to, organising trade and investment
promotion activities, such as trade and investment missions, regular business
seminars and fora.

4. Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries: the Parties, recognising the
existence of opportunities for collaboration and technical cooperation in
agriculture, forestry and fisheries and aquaculture, agroindustry, food security,
ecotourism and investment in farms and facilities, shall establish cooperation
for mutual benefit of the Parties.

5. Electronic Commerce: the Parties, recognising the fundamental role
of electronic commerce in facilitating and expanding trade, shall cooperate to
promote the development of electronic commerce with a view to obtaining the
maximum benefit of the use of electronic commerce. Such cooperation may
include, but is not limited to, assisting small and medium enterprises
development in electronic commerce sector, enhancing electronic commerce
development policy and regulations and addressing challenges related to the
development and use of electronic commerce.

6. Technical Regulations, Standards and Conformity Assessment
Procedures: the Parties, recognising the important role of technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures in facilitating
trade in goods, shall, on the basis of mutual benefit, strengthen their
cooperation thereon. Such cooperation may include, but is not limited to, the
development of testing laboratories and an accreditation network as well as
testing programs, and the development of technical regulations, standards and
conformity assessment procedures in areas of mutual interest.

7. Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures: the Parties, recognising the
importance of sanitary and phytosanitary (hereinafter referred to as “SPS’’)
measures in minimising their negative impact on trade, while protecting
human, animal or plant life or health, shall establish cooperation for mutual
benefit of the Parties.

6-2

8. Trade and Investment-Related Legal Framework: the Parties,
recognising the important role of trade and investment-related legal
framework in facilitating trade and investment opportunities, with the financial
and technical assistance mobilised and funded by the Parties, shall cooperate
to develop and improve commercial legal frameworks. Such cooperation may
include, but is not limited to, assisting the development of the legal system
such as contract law, commercial law, food law, and other laws agreed upon
by the Parties.

9. Infrastructure Development: the Parties shall explore opportunities to
cooperate in areas including infrastructural construction development,
construction technology and infrastructural construction design.

10. Industrial Development: the Parties shall promote customised
industrial cooperation for mutual prosperity in areas including diversifying and
upgrading their industrial structures, building energy infrastructure for
industrial development and the industrial materials and construction facilities
market to meet demand and supply.

11. Information and Communication Technology: the Parties,
recognising the rapid development, led by the private sector, of information
and communication technology (hereinafter referred to as “ICT’’) and of
business practices concerning ICT-related services both in domestic and
international contexts, shall cooperate to promote the development of ICT and
ICT-related services with a view to obtaining the maximum benefit of the use
of ICT. Such cooperation may include, but is not limited to, improving ICT
policies, the creation of ICT-related services, the provision of e-government
services, content development, network security and the protection of privacy,
network infrastructure, creative and multimedia industries and ICT
infrastructure development.

12. Cooperation to alleviate the economic impact of the pandemic is
specified in Annex 6-A.

Article 6.3: Capacity Building and Technical Assistance

The Parties, recognising the development and capacity gaps between
the Parties and the importance of capacity building for expanding trade and
investment, shall develop capacity building and technical assistance activities,
as agreed upon by the Parties, to support the implementation of this Agreement
and other areas as mutually agreed.

Article 6.4: Committee on Economic Cooperation

6-3

1. For purposes of the effective implementation of this Chapter, a
Committee on Economic Cooperation composed of government
representatives of each Party shall be established.

2. The functions of the Committee shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(a) developing and coordinating a Work Programme and _ its

implementing mechanism;

(b) working with other Committees to establish and maintaining
effective communication and coordination on economic
cooperation activities and relevant issues; and

(c) monitoring and evaluating the implementation of the Work
Programme to assess the progress of Work Programme, as well
as providing recommendations to the Parties, where necessary,
for improving the implementation.

Article 6.5: Work Programme

1. For purposes of this Chapter, the Work Programme means the list of
economic and technical cooperation activities mutually determined by the
Parties. The Work Programme shall be monitored by the Committee on
Economic Cooperation for its effective implementation.

2. The Work Programme shall be developed by the Committee on
Economic Cooperation in consultation with other established Committees in
this Agreement, taking into consideration the priority areas of Economic
Cooperation.

3. To encourage effective implementation and utilisation of this
Agreement, in the Work Programme the Parties will give priority to the forms
of cooperation as below, to the extent possible:

(a) supporting human resources development, capacity building,
technical assistance, exchanges of views and information, and
financial support from available resources;

(b) raising public awareness of areas of mutual interest;
(c) enhancing access to information and opportunities for
businesses;

6-4

(d) conducting joint research and development as well as
exchanges of experts;

(e) sharing experience, best practices and the best modality for
development of sectors of mutual interest;

(f) formulating development policy and strategy;
(g) transferring technology;

(h) conducting professional training programs and joint seminars
to disseminate knowledge and experiences in legal practices,
and formulating projects to improve trade and investment-
related laws;

(1) strengthening cooperation at relevant international and regional
fora; and
(j) other forms of cooperation as agreed upon by the Parties.

4. The Work Programme shall be modified by the Committee as and when
necessary, subject to the consent of the Parties.

5. Each Party shall designate relevant officials as contact points for
coordinating the implementation of the Work Programme after the entry into
force of this Agreement. Each Party shall provide the contact details of their
respective contact points, and notify promptly of any change in its contact
points or any amendment to the details of its contact points.

6. The Parties shall explore opportunities to include priority investment
projects in areas of mutual interest in the Work Programme as agreed upon by
the Parties.

Article 6.6: Resources

1. The Parties shall provide resources for economic cooperation under this
Chapter according to their mutual agreement.

2. The Parties shall utilise the existing financial channels, or other
resources for the economic cooperation Work Programme under this
Agreement in accordance with their respective domestic laws and regulations.

3. The Parties, on the basis of mutual benefit, may consider cooperation
with, and contribution from:

6-5

(a) | non-Parties, development partners; or

(b) sub-regional, regional, or international organisations or
institutions,

that are interested in developing mutually beneficial cooperation and
partnerships, to support the implementation of the Work Programme.

Article 6.7: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Dispute settlement mechanisms in this Agreement shall not apply to any
matter arising under this Chapter.

6-6

CHAPTER SEVEN
TRANSPARENCY

Article 7.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:

administrative ruling of general application means an administrative ruling
or interpretation that applies to all persons and fact situations that fall
generally within its ambit and that establishes a norm of conduct but does not
include:

(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or quasi-
judicial proceeding that applies to a particular person, good, or
service of the other Party in a specific case; or

(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or
practice.

Article 7.2: Publication

1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures, and
administrative rulings of general application relating to any matter covered by
this Agreement are promptly published or otherwise made publicly available
in such a manner as to enable interested persons and the other Party to become
acquainted with them.

2. To the extent possible and practicable, each Party, in accordance with
its domestic laws and regulations, shall:

(a) publish in advance measures referred to in paragraph | that it
proposes to adopt; and

(b) provide interested persons and the other Party with a reasonable
opportunity to comment on such proposed measures.

Article 7.3: Provision of Information

Upon request of a Party, the other Party shall, to the extent possible and
practicable, promptly provide information and respond to questions pertaining
to any actual or proposed measures referred to in Article 7.2 that the
requesting Party considers might affect the operation of this Agreement,
regardless of whether the requesting Party has been previously notified of that

7-1

measure.

Article 7.4: Administrative Proceedings

With a view to administering in a consistent, impartial, and reasonable manner
its laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative rulings of general
application relating to any matter covered by this Agreement, each Party shall
ensure, in its administrative proceedings, applying measures referred to in
Article 7.2 to particular persons, goods, or services of the other Party in
specific cases, that:

(a) wherever possible, in accordance with its domestic laws and
regulations, persons of the other Party that are directly affected
by a proceeding are provided reasonable notice when a
proceeding is initiated, including a description of the nature of
the proceeding, a statement of the legal authority under which
the proceeding is initiated, and a general description of any
issues in controversy;

(b) persons of the other Party that are directly affected by a
proceeding are afforded a reasonable opportunity to present
facts and arguments in support of their positions prior to any
final administrative action, when time, the nature of the
proceeding, and the public interest permit; and

(c) its procedures are in accordance with its domestic laws and
regulations.

Article 7.5: Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial, or
administrative tribunals or procedures for the purposes of the prompt review
and, where warranted, correction of administrative actions relating to any
matter covered by this Agreement. Such tribunals shall be impartial and
independent of the office or authority entrusted with administrative
enforcement and shall not have any substantial interest in the outcome of the
matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, in any such tribunals or procedures, the
parties to the proceeding are provided with the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective
positions; and

(b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record or,
where required by its domestic laws and regulations the record
compiled by the administrative authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided
for in its domestic laws and regulations, that any decision referred to in
subparagraph 2(b) shall be implemented by, and shall govern the practice of,
the office or authority with respect to the administrative action at issue.

Article 7.6: Cooperation on Promoting Increased Transparency and
Combating Corruption

1. The Parties agree to cooperate in bilateral ways to promote
transparency in respect of international trade and investment

2. The Parties affirm their resolve to combat bribery and corruption in
international trade and investment in accordance with its applicable laws and
regulations.

3. The Parties, subscribing to the principles of good administrative
behaviour, agree to cooperate in promoting regulatory quality and performance,
including through exchange of information and best practices on their
respective policies and regulations.

CHAPTER EIGHT
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
Article 8.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:
arbitration panel means a panel established under Article 8.7;

arbitrator means a member of an arbitration panel established under Article
8.7;

candidate means an individual who is under consideration for appointment as
the third arbitrator under Article 8.9;

complaining Party means a Party that requests the establishment of an
arbitration panel under Article 8.7; and

Party complained against means the Party that is alleged to be in violation of
this Agreement, as referred to in Article 8.3.

Article 8.2: Objective

1. The objective of this Chapter is to provide an effective, efficient, and
transparent process for the avoidance and settlement of disputes arising under
this Agreement.

2. The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation
and application of this Agreement, and shall make every attempt through
cooperation and consultations to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of
any matter raised in accordance with this Chapter.

Article 8.3: Scope

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter shall
apply with respect to the avoidance or settlement of disputes between the
Parties regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement wherever

a Party considers that:

(a) a measure adopted by the other Party is inconsistent with its
obligations under this Agreement; or

8-1

(b) the other Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations
under this Agreement.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to Chapter Six (Economic Cooperation),
Section B (Anti-Dumping and Countervailing Duties) in Chapter Five (Trade
Remedies), Article 2.15 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and Article 7.6
(Cooperation on Promoting Increased Transparency and Combating
Corruption), and Annex 3-B (Treatment for Certain Goods).

Article 8.4: Choice of Forum

1. Where a dispute arises under this Agreement and under any other
agreement to which both Parties are party, including the WTO agreement, the
complaining Party may have recourse to dispute settlement procedures
available under any of such agreements to settle the dispute.

2. Once the complaining Party has requested the establishment of, or
referred a matter to, a dispute settlement panel under an agreement referred to
in paragraph 1, the forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of other fora.

Article 8.5: Consultations

1. Either Party may request consultations with the other Party with
respect to any matter relating to the interpretation and application of this
Agreement, pursuant to Article 8.3.1.

2. The Party requesting consultations shall make the request in writing
and shall give the reasons for the request, including the identification of the
specific measure at issue and an indication of the factual and legal basis for the
complaint.

3. The Party complained against shall reply within 10 days from the date
of the receipt of the request for consultations.

4. The Parties shall enter into consultations in good faith, with a view to
reaching a mutually satisfactory solution, within 30 days or within 15 days in
cases of urgency, including those concerning perishable goods, from the date
of receipt of the request for consultations. Unless the Parties otherwise agree,
consultations shall take place in the territory of the Party complained against.

5. During consultations, the Parties shall provide sufficient information to
enable a full examination of how the measure at issue might affect the
implementation and application of this Agreement. The Parties shall treat any
confidential information exchanged in the course of consultations on the same

8-2

basis as the Party providing the information.

6. Consultations under this Article shall be confidential and without
prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further proceedings.

Article 8.6: Good Offices, Conciliation, or Mediation

1. Good offices, conciliation, and mediation are procedures that are
undertaken voluntarily if the Parties so agree.

2. Good offices, conciliation, or mediation may be requested at any time
by either Party. They may begin at any time by agreement of the Parties and be
terminated at any time upon request of either Party.

3. If the Parties agree, good offices, conciliation, or mediation may
continue while the proceedings of the arbitration panel provided for in this
Chapter are in progress.

4. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation, or mediation, and, in
particular, positions taken by the Parties during these proceedings, shall be
confidential, and without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further
proceedings.

Article 8.7: Establishment of the Arbitration Panel

l. The complaining Party that made a request for consultations under
Article 8.5 may request the establishment of an arbitration panel if:

(a) the Party complained against does not enter into consultations
within 30 days, or within 15 days in cases of urgency
including those concerning perishable goods, from the date of
receipt of the request for such consultations; or

(b) the Parties fail to resolve the dispute through consultations
within 60 days, or within 30 days in cases of urgency
including those concerning perishable goods, from the date of
receipt of the request for such consultations.

2. The request for the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be made
in writing to the Party complained against. The complaining Party shall
identify in its request, the specific measure at issue, and the factual and legal
basis for the complaint sufficient to present the problem clearly.

8-3

Article 8.8: Terms of Reference of the Arbitration Panel

Unless the Parties otherwise agree within 20 days from the date of receipt of
the request for the establishment of an arbitration panel, the terms of reference
of the arbitration panel shall be:

“To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement,
the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of an
arbitration panel pursuant to Article 8.7, to make findings,
determinations, and, if applicable, recommendations and to present
written reports as provided in Articles 8.12 and 8.13.”

Article 8.9: Composition of the Arbitration Panel

1. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, an arbitration panel shall
consist of three arbitrators.

2. The complaining Party and the Party complained against shall, within
30 days from the date of receipt of the request for the establishment of the
arbitration panel, each appoint one arbitrator, who may be its national, and
propose up to three candidates for appointment as the third arbitrator who shall
be the chair of the arbitration panel. The candidates for the third arbitrator
shall not be nationals of either Party, nor have their usual place of residence in
either Party, nor be employed by either Party, nor have dealt with the dispute
in any capacity.

3. The Parties shall endeavour to agree on and appoint the third arbitrator
within 30 days of the appointment of the second arbitrator pursuant to
paragraph 2, taking into account the candidates proposed. If the Parties fail to
agree on and appoint the third arbitrator within this period, the Parties shall
meet within the next seven days and select the chair by lot from the list of
candidates proposed by both Parties.

4. The date of the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be the date
on which the third arbitrator is appointed.

5. All arbitrators shall have expertise or experience in law, international
trade, or other matters relating to this Agreement, or in the resolution of
disputes arising under international trade agreements. Each arbitrator shall be
independent, serve in his or her individual capacities, and not be affiliated with,
nor take instructions from, either Party or organization related to the dispute,
and shall comply with Annex 8-B.

8-4

6. Where a Party considers that an arbitrator does not comply with the
requirements of Annex 8-B, the Parties shall consult and replace, if so agreed,
that arbitrator in accordance with paragraph 7.

7. If an arbitrator appointed under this Article resigns or becomes unable
to participate in the proceedings, or is to be replaced according to paragraph 6,
a successor shall be selected within 15 days in accordance with the
appointment method provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3, mutatis mutandis.
The successor shall have all the powers and duties of the original arbitrator.
The work of the arbitration panel shall be suspended for a period beginning on
the date the arbitrator resigns or becomes unable to participate in the
proceeding, or is to be replaced according to paragraph 6. The work of the
arbitration panel shall resume on the date the successor is appointed.

Article 8.10: Proceedings of the Arbitration Panel

1. The arbitration panel shall meet in closed sessions. The Parties shall
be present at the meetings only when invited by the arbitration panel to appear
before it.

2. The Parties shall be given the opportunity to provide at least one
written submission and to attend any of the presentations, statements, or
rebuttals in the proceedings. All information provided or written submissions
made by a Party to the arbitration panel, including any comments on the
interim report and responses to questions put by the arbitration panel, shall be
made available to the other Party.

3. A Party asserting that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with
this Agreement shall have the burden of establishing such inconsistency. A
Party asserting that a measure is subject to an exception under this Agreement
shall have the burden of establishing that the exception applies.

4. The arbitration panel should consult with the Parties as appropriate
and provide adequate opportunities for the development of a mutually
satisfactory resolution.

5. The arbitration panel shall interpret this Agreement in accordance
with the customary rules of interpretation of public international law including
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.

6. The arbitration panel shall make its decisions, including its reports, by
consensus, provided that where an arbitration panel is unable to reach

consensus, the decisions may be made by majority vote.

7. Upon request of a Party, or on its own initiative, the arbitration panel

may seek information from any relevant source and may consult experts to
obtain their opinion or technical advice on certain aspects of the matter. Before
doing so, the arbitration panel shall seek the views of the Parties, without
prejudice to its right to seek information. The arbitration panel shall provide
the Parties with a copy of any advice or opinion obtained and an opportunity
to provide comments.

8. The deliberations of the arbitration panel and the documents
submitted to it shall be kept confidential.

9. Notwithstanding paragraph 8, either Party may make _ public
statements as to its views regarding the dispute, but shall treat as confidential
information and written submissions delivered by the other Party to the
arbitration panel which the other Party has designated as confidential. Where a
Party has provided information or written submissions designated to be
confidential, that Party shall, within 20 days from a request of the other Party,
provide a non-confidential summary of the information or written submissions
which may be disclosed publicly.

10. The reports of the arbitration panel shall be drafted without the
presence of the Parties. The arbitration panel shall base its report on the
relevant provisions of this Agreement, and the submissions and arguments of
the Parties, and may take into account any other relevant information provided
to the arbitration panel.

11. The reports of the arbitration panel shall contain both the descriptive
parts summarising the submissions or arguments of the Parties, and the
findings and determinations of the arbitration panel. If the Parties agree, the
arbitration panel may make recommendations for resolution of the dispute in
its reports. The findings and determinations and, if applicable, any
recommendations of the arbitration panel cannot add to or diminish the rights
and obligations of the Parties provided for in this Agreement.

12. The venue for the arbitration panel proceedings shall be decided by
mutual agreement between the Parties. If there is no agreement, the venue
shall alternate between the capitals of the Parties with the first meeting of the
arbitration panel proceedings to be held in the capital of the Party complained
against.

Article 8.11: Suspension or Termination of Proceedings

1. Where the Parties agree, the arbitration panel may suspend its work at
any time for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date of such
agreement. Upon request of a Party, the arbitration panel proceedings shall be
resumed after such suspension. In the event of such suspension, the

timeframes regarding the work of the arbitration panel shall be extended by
the amount of time that the work was suspended. If the work of the arbitration
panel has been continuously suspended for more than 12 months, the authority
of the arbitration panel shall lapse unless the Parties otherwise agree.

2. The Parties may agree to terminate the proceedings of an arbitration
panel by jointly so notifying the chair of the arbitration panel at any time
before the issuance of the final report to the Parties.

3. Before the arbitration panel makes its decision, it may, at any stage of
the proceedings, propose to the Parties that the dispute be settled amicably.

Article 8.12: Interim Report

1. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the arbitration panel shall, within
90 days from the date of the establishment of the arbitration panel, issue to the
Parties an interim report containing the descriptive parts, the findings and
determinations, and, if applicable, any recommendations as to:

(a) whether the measure at issue is inconsistent with the
obligations of this Agreement; or

(b) whether a Party has otherwise failed to carry out its
obligations under this Agreement,

as well as the applicability of the relevant provisions and the basic rationale
behind any findings.

2. Where the arbitration panel considers that the deadline for interim
report cannot be met, it may extend the period with the consent of the Parties
with the written notification stating the reasons for the delay and the date on
which the panel plans to issue its interim report. Under no circumstances
should the interim report be issued later than 120 days after the date of the
establishment of the arbitration panel.

3. Either Party may submit written comments to the arbitration panel on
its interim report within 15 days from the issuance of the report. After
considering any written comments by the Parties on the interim report, the
arbitration panel may modify its report and make any further examination it
considers appropriate.

Article 8.13: Final Report

1. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the arbitration panel shall issue a

final report to the Parties within 30 days from the date of issuance of the
interim report.

2. Where the arbitration panel considers that the deadline for its final
report cannot be met, it may extend the period with the consent of the Parties
with the written notification stating the reasons for the delay and the date on
which the panel plans to issue its final report. Under no circumstances should
the final report be issued later than 150 days after the date of the establishment
of the arbitration panel.

3. In cases of urgency, including those concerning perishable goods, the
arbitration panel shall make every effort to issue its interim and final reports
within half of the respective time periods under Articles 8.12.1 and 8.13.1.

Article 8.14: Implementation of the Final Report

1. The determinations of the final report of the arbitration panel shall be
final and binding on the Parties.

2. If, in its final report, the arbitration panel determines that the Party
complained against has not conformed to its obligations under the relevant
provisions of this Agreement, unless the Parties otherwise agree, the Party
complained against shall eliminate the non-conformity immediately, or if this
is not practicable, within a reasonable period of time.

3. The reasonable period of time referred to in paragraph 2 shall be
mutually agreed by the Parties. Where the Parties fail to agree on the
reasonable period of time within 45 days from the date of issuance of the final
report of the arbitration panel, either Party may refer the matter to the original
arbitration panel, which shall determine the reasonable period of time.

4. The Party complained against shall notify to the complaining Party any
measures that it has taken to comply with the determinations of the arbitration
panel, before the expiry of the reasonable period of time agreed by the Parties
or determined by the original arbitration panel in accordance with paragraph 3.
Where there is disagreement between the Parties as to whether the Party
complained against has eliminated the non-conformity as determined in the
final report of the arbitration panel within the reasonable period of time as
determined pursuant to paragraph 3, either Party may refer the matter to the
original arbitration panel.

Article 8.15: Non-Implementation, Compensation and Suspension of
Concessions or Other Obligations

8-8

l. If the Party complained against fails to notify the implementing
measures before the expiry of the reasonable period of time, or notifies to the
complaining Party that implementation is impracticable, or the arbitration
panel to which the matter is referred pursuant to Article 8.14.4 determines that
the Party complained against has failed to eliminate the non-conformity within
the reasonable period of time, the Party complained against shall, if so
requested, enter into negotiations with the complaining Party with a view to
reaching a mutually satisfactory compensation.

2. If there is no agreement on satisfactory compensation within 20 days
from the date of receipt of the request mentioned in paragraph 1, the
complaining Party may, at any time thereafter, provide written notice to the
Party complained against that it intends to suspend the application to the Party
complained against of concessions or other obligations under this Agreement.
The complaining Party shall have the right to begin suspending concessions or
other obligations 30 days after the notification of such suspension. The
notification shall indicate the level and scope of the suspension of concessions
or other obligations.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, the complaining Party shall not exercise
the right to begin suspending concessions or other obligations under paragraph
2 where:

(a) an examination is being undertaken pursuant to paragraph 6;
or
(b) a mutually agreed solution has been reached.

For greater certainty, the complaining Party may not suspend the application
of concessions or other obligations before the issuance of the arbitration
panel’s determination pursuant to this Article.

4. The compensation referred to in paragraph 1 and the suspension
referred to in paragraph 2 shall be temporary measures. Neither compensation
nor suspension is preferred to full elimination of the non-conformity as
determined in the report of the arbitration panel. The suspension shall only be
applied until such time as the non-conformity is fully eliminated or a mutually
satisfactory solution is reached.

5. In considering what concessions or other obligations to suspend
pursuant to paragraph 2:

(a) the complaining Party should first seek to suspend
concessions or other obligations with respect to the same
sector or sectors as that in which the report of the arbitration
panel referred to in Article 8.13 has found a failure to comply

with the obligations under this Agreement;

(b) if the complaining Party considers that it 1s not practicable or
effective to suspend concessions or other obligations with
respect to the same sector or sectors, it may suspend
concessions or other obligations with respect to other sectors.
The notification of such suspension pursuant to paragraph 2
shall indicate the reasons on which it is based; and

(c) the level of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall be
equivalent to the level of the nullification or impairment.

6. If the Party complained against considers that the requirements for the
suspension of concessions or other obligations by the complaining Party set
out in paragraph 2, 3, 4, or 5 have not been met, it may refer the matter to the
original arbitration panel.

7. The arbitration panel that is established for purposes of this Article or
Article 8.14 shall, wherever possible, have, as its arbitrators, the arbitrators of
the original arbitration panel. If this is not possible, then the arbitrators of the
arbitration panel that is established for purposes of this Article or Article 8.14
shall be appointed pursuant to Article 8.9. The arbitration panel established
under this Article or Article 8.14 shall issue its report to the Parties within 20
days on the reasonable period of time and 45 days on the other issues after the
date when the matter is referred to it. When the arbitration panel considers that
it cannot issue its report within the aforementioned periods, the relevant period
may be extended by the arbitration panel for a maximum of 30 days with the
consent of the Parties. The report shall be binding on the Parties.

Article 8.16: Rules of Procedure

1. Dispute settlement proceedings under this Chapter shall be governed
by the Rules of Procedure set out in Annex 8-A. The Parties in consultation
with the arbitration panel may agree to adopt additional rules of procedures
not inconsistent with the provisions of the Annex.

2. Any period of time or other rule of procedure for arbitration panel
provided for in this Chapter and Annex 8-A may be modified by mutual
consent of the Parties.

Article 8.17: Expenses

1. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, each Party shall bear the costs of
its appointed arbitrator and its own expenses and legal costs.

2. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the costs of the chair of the
arbitration panel and other expenses associated with the conduct of its
proceedings shall be borne in equal shares by the Parties.

CHAPTER NINE
EXCEPTIONS

Article 9.1: General Exceptions

For purposes of Chapter Two (Trade in Goods), Chapter Three (Rules of
Origin), Chapter Four (Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation), and
Chapter Five (Trade Remedies), Article XX of GATT 1994 and its
interpretative notes are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement,
mutatis mutandis.

Article 9.2: Security Exceptions

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:
(a) require a Party to furnish any information, the disclosure of
which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;
(b) prevent a Party from taking any action which it considers
necessary for the protection of its essential security interests:

(i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition, and
implements of war and to such traffic in other goods
and materials as carried on, directly or indirectly, for the
purposes of supplying a military establishment;

(i1) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the
materials from which they are derived;

(41) relating to the protection of critical public infrastructure
from deliberate attempts intended to disable or degrade
such infrastructure; or

(iv) taken in time of national emergency, war or other
emergency in international relations; or

(c) prevent a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its

obligations under the United Nations Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

' The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XX(b) of GATT 1994 include
environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal, or plant life or health, and that
Article XX(g) of GATT 1994 applies to measures relating to the conservation of living and
non-living exhaustible natural resources.

2. The Joint Committee shall be informed to the fullest extent possible of
measures taken under subparagraphs 1(b) and (c) and of their termination.

Article 9.3: Taxation

1. Except as set out in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply
to taxation measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of
either Party under any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency
between this Agreement and any such tax convention, the latter shall prevail to
the extent of the inconsistency. In the case of a tax convention between the
Parties, the competent authorities under that convention shall have sole
responsibility for determining whether any inconsistency exists between this
Agreement and that convention.

3. This Agreement shall only grant rights or impose obligations with
respect to taxation measures where they are granted or imposed under Article
2.3 (National Treatment) to the extent provided under Article HI of GATT
1994.

4. For purposes of this Article:

(a) tax convention means a convention for the elimination of
double taxation with respect to taxes on income and capital
gains and the prevention of tax evasion and avoidance or other
international taxation agreement or arrangement to which both
Parties are party;

(b) taxes and taxation measures do not include customs duties as
defined in Article 1.1 (General Definitions) and measures listed
in exceptions (b), (c), (d), and (e) of that definition; and

(c) competent authorities means:
(1) for Korea, the Deputy Minister for Tax and Customs,
Ministry of Economy and Finance, or his or her

successor; and

(ii) for Cambodia, the Minister of Economy and Finance or
the Minister's authorised representative.

Article 9.4: Disclosure of Information

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to furnish or
allow access to confidential information the disclosure of which would impede
law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or which
would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises,
public or private.

Article 9.5: Confidentiality

Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, where a Party provides
information to the other Party in accordance with this Agreement and
designates the information as confidential, the Party receiving the information
shall maintain the confidentiality of the information.

CHAPTER TEN
INSTITUTIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Section A: Institutional Provisions

Article 10.1: Joint Committee

1. The Parties hereby establish a Joint Committee composed of relevant
government officials of each Party. It shall be co-chaired by the Minister for
Trade, Industry and Energy of Korea and the Minister of Commerce of
Cambodia, or their respective designees.

2. The Joint Committee shall:

(a)

review and supervise the implementation and operation of this
Agreement;

(b) supervise and coordinate the work of all committees, working
groups, and other bodies established under this Agreement;

(c) consider ways to further enhance trade and investment relations
between the Parties;

(d) without prejudice to the procedures under Chapter Eight
(Dispute Settlement), seek to resolve problems or disputes that
may arise relating to the interpretation or application of this
Agreement;

(e) monitor the progress of the Work Programme and provide
guidance; and

(f) consider any other matter that may affect the operation of this
Agreement, or other areas covered by this Agreement as the
Parties may agree.

3. The Joint Committee may:

(a) establish and delegate responsibilities to ad hoc and standing
committees, working groups, or other bodies;

(b) consider and recommend to the Parties any amendment to this
Agreement;

(c) adopt interpretations of the provisions of this Agreement;

(d) adopt its own rules of procedure; and

(e) make recommendations to the Parties.
4. When a Party submits information considered as confidential under its
laws and regulations to the Joint Committee, committees, working groups, or
any other bodies, the other Party shall treat that information as confidential.
Article 10.2: Procedures of the Joint Committee

1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Joint Committee shall convene:

(a) the first session within 12 months from the entry into force of
this Agreement;

(b) in annual regular session thereafter, with such sessions to be
held alternately in the territory of each Party; and

(c) in special session within 30 days from receipt of a request of
either Party, with such sessions to be held in the territory of the
other Party or at such other locations as the Parties may agree.

2. The meetings of the Joint Committee may be held in person or, if
agreed by the Parties, by any technological means available to them.

3. All decisions and recommendations of the Joint Committee shall be
taken by mutual agreement.
Article 10.3: Committees and Working Groups

1. The following Committees are hereby established under the auspices of
the Joint Committee.

(a) The Committee on Trade in Goods; in accordance with Article
2.17 (Committee on Trade in Goods)

(b) The Committee on Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures, in
accordance with Article 4.18 (Committee on Rules of Origin
and Customs Procedures)

(c) The Committee on Economic Cooperation, in accordance with
Article 6.4 (Committee on Economic Cooperation)

2. The Joint Committee may establish additional committees, working
groups, or any other bodies, including the Committee on Transparency
pursuant to Article 10.6.(b)(Work Programme) under this Agreement.

3. The composition, frequency of meetings, and functions of the
committees, working groups, or any other bodies shall be in accordance with
the relevant provisions of this Agreement or determined by the Joint
Committee consistent with this Agreement.

4. The committees, working groups, or any other bodies shall inform the
Joint Committee of their schedules and agendas sufficiently in advance of their
meetings. They shall report to the Joint Committee on their activities at each
regular meeting of the Joint Committee.

5. The Joint Committee may decide to change or undertake a task
assigned to a committee, a working group, or any other body, or may dissolve
a committee, a working group, or any other body.
Article 10.4: Contact Points
1. In order to facilitate communications between the Parties on any trade
matter covered by this Agreement, the Parties hereby establish the following
contact points:

(a) for Korea, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy; and

(b) for Cambodia, the Ministry of Commerce;
or their respective successors.
2. Upon the request of either Party, the contact point of the other Party
shall indicate the office or official responsible for any matter relating to the
implementation of this Agreement, and provide the required support to

facilitate communications with the requesting Party. Each Party shall notify
the other Party of any change in its contact point in due time.

Section B: Final Provisions

Article 10.5: Annexes, Appendices, and Footnotes

The Annexes, Appendices, and footnotes to this Agreement shall form an
integral part of this Agreement.

Article 10.6: Work Programme
The Parties shall:

(a) consult and initiate negotiations on trade in services and
investment within one year after the entry into force of this
Agreement; and

(b) establish a Committee on Transparency within a reasonable
period of time as agreed by the Parties, with a view to the
effective implementation and operation of Chapter Seven
(Transparency).

Article 10.7: Review of the Agreement

After four years following the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or at
any time thereafter upon the request of a Party, the Parties may undertake a
review of this Agreement with a view to furthering these objectives of the
Agreement. The review may include, but is not limited to, improvement of the
market access of the Parties for the purpose of enhancing trade between the
Parties.

Article 10.8: Amendments

The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. Any amendment
shall enter into force after the Parties exchange written notifications through
diplomatic channels certifying that they have completed all necessary
domestic legal requirements and procedures, on such date as the Parties may
agree. The amendments shall form an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 10.9: Amendments to the WTO Agreement

If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated into
this Agreement is amended, the Parties shall enter into consultation to consider
amending the relevant provisions of this Agreement, as appropriate, in
accordance with Article 10.8.

Article 10.10: Entry into Force

This Agreement shall enter into force 60 days after the date on which the
Parties have exchanged written notifications through diplomatic channels

certifying that they have completed all necessary domestic legal requirements
and procedures, or on such other date as the Parties may agree in writing.

Article 10.11: Termination

Either Party may terminate this Agreement by written notification through
diplomatic channels to the other Party and such termination shall take effect
six months after the date of the notification.

Article 10.12: Authentic Texts
This Agreement is drawn up in duplicate in the Korean, Khmer and English

languages, all texts being equally authentic. In case of any divergence of
interpretation, the English text shall prevail.