RECOGNISING their longstanding and strong partnership based on the
common principles and values reflected in the Partnership and Cooperation
Agreement, and their important economic, trade and investment relationship;

DESIRING to further strengthen their economic relationship as part of, and in
a manner coherent with, their overall relations, and convinced that this
Agreement will create a new climate for the development of trade and
investment between the Parties;

RECOGNISING that this Agreement will complement and promote regional
economic integration efforts;

DETERMINED to strengthen their economic, trade and investment
relationship in accordance with the objective of sustainable development, in its
economic, social and environmental dimensions, and to promote trade and
investment under this Agreement in a manner mindful of high levels of
environmental and labour protection and relevant internationally recognised
standards and agreements;

DESIRING to raise living standards, promote economic growth and stability,
create new employment opportunities and improve the general welfare and, to
this end, reaffirming their commitment to promote trade and investment
liberalisation;

CONVINCED that this Agreement will create an expanded and secure market
for goods and services and a stable and predictable environment for trade and

EU/VN/en 2

investment, thus enhancing the competitiveness of their firms in global
markets;

REAFFIRMING their commitment to the Charter of the United Nations,
signed in San Francisco on 26 June 1945, and having regard to the principles
articulated in The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on 10 December 1948;

RECOGNISING the importance of transparency in international trade to the
benefit of all stakeholders;

SEEKING to establish clear and mutually advantageous rules governing their
trade and investment and to reduce or eliminate the barriers to mutual trade
and investment;RESOLVED to contribute to the harmonious development and
expansion of international trade by removing obstacles to trade through this
Agreement and to avoid creating new barriers to trade or investment between
the Parties that could reduce the benefits of this Agreement;

BUILDING on their respective rights and obligations under the WTO
Agreement and other multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements and
arrangements to which they are party;

DESIRING to promote the competitiveness of their companies by providing
them with a predictable legal framework for their trade and investment
relations,

HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:

EU/VN/en 3

CHAPTER 1

OBJECTIVES AND GENERAL DEFINITIONS

ARTICLE 1.1
Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties hereby establish a free trade area, in conformity with Article
XXIV of GATT 1994 and Article V of GATS.

ARTICLE 1.2
Objectives

The objectives of this Agreement are to liberalise and facilitate trade and
investment between the Parties in accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement.

ARTICLE 1.3
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement

For the purposes of this Agreement, "Partnership and Cooperation Agreement"
means the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Partnership and
Cooperation between the European Union and its Member States, of the one
part, and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, of the other part, signed in
Brussels on 27 June 2012.

ARTICLE 1.4
WTO Agreements
For the purposes of this Agreement:

(a) "Agreement on Agriculture" means the Agreement on Agriculture

EU/VN/en 4

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(1)

(m)

contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"Agreement on Government Procurement" means the Agreement on
Government Procurement contained in Annex 4 of the WTO Agreement;

"Agreement on Preshipment Inspection" means the Agreement on
Preshipment Inspection contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"Agreement on Rules of Origin" means the Agreement on Rules of Origin
contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"Anti-Dumping Agreement" means the Agreement on Implementation of
Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 contained
in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"Customs Valuation Agreement" means the Agreement on
Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade 1994 contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"DSU" means the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing
the Settlement of Disputes contained in Annex 2 of the WTO Agreement;

"GATS" means the General Agreement on Trade in Services contained in
Annex 1B of the WTO Agreement;

"GATT 1994" means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994
contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"Import Licensing Agreement" means the Agreement on Import
Licensing Procedures contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"Safeguards Agreement" means the Agreement on Safeguards contained
in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"SCM Agreement" means the Agreement on _ Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures contained in Annex 1A of the WTO
Agreement;

"SPS Agreement" means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary
and Phytosanitary Measures contained in Annex 1A of the WTO
Agreement;

EU/VN/en 5

(n)

(0)

(p)

"TBT Agreement" means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade
contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"TRIPS Agreement" means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights contained in Annex IC of the WTO
Agreement; and

"WTO Agreement" means the Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organisation, done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994.

ARTICLE 1.5

General Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)
(f)

(g)

"day" means a calendar day;

"domestic" means, with regard to legislation, law or laws and regulations
for the Union and its Member States and for Viet Nam!, respectively,
legislation, law or laws and regulations at central, regional or local level;

"goods" means products as understood in GATT 1994, unless otherwise
provided for in this Agreement;

"Harmonised System" means the Harmonised Commodity Description
and Coding System, including all legal notes and amendments thereto
(hereinafter referred to as the "HS");

"IMF" means the International Monetary Fund;

"measure" means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law,
regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action or any other
form;

"natural person of a Party" means a national of one of the Member States

For greater certainty, for Viet Nam the relevant forms of legislation, law or laws and
regulation at the central level or local level are provided for in the Law No. 80/2015/QH13 of
22 June 2015 on the Promulgation of Legal Normative Documents, as amended.

EU/VN/en 6

of the Union or of Viet Nam, according to their respective legislation;!
(h) "person" means a natural person or a legal person;

(1) "third country" means a country or territory outside the scope of
territorial application of this Agreement as defined in Article 17.24
(Territorial Application);

(j) "UNCLOS" means the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
done at Montego Bay on 10 December 1982;

(k) "WIPO" means the World Intellectual Property Organisation; and

(1) "WTO" means the World Trade Organisation.

CHAPTER 2

NATIONAL TREATMENT AND MARKET ACCESS FOR GOODS

ARTICLE 2.1
Objective

The Parties shall progressively liberalise trade in goods and improve market
access over a transitional period starting from the entry into force of this
Agreement in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and in
conformity with Article XXIV of GATT 1994.

ARTICLE 2.2
Scope

Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this Chapter applies to
trade in goods between the Parties.

The term "natural person" includes natural persons permanently residing in Latvia who are
not citizens of Latvia or any other state but who are entitled, under the laws and regulations
of Latvia, to receive a non-citizen's passport (Alien's Passport).

EU/VN/en 7

ARTICLE 2.3

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

"agricultural export subsidies" means subsidies as defined in paragraph
(e) of Article 1 of the Agreement on Agriculture, including any
amendment of that Article;

"agricultural good" means a product listed in Annex | to the Agreement
on Agriculture;

"consular transactions" means the procedure of obtaining from a consul
of the importing Party in the territory of the exporting Party, or in the
territory of a third country, a consular invoice or a consular visa for a
commercial invoice, certificate of origin, manifest, shipper's export
declaration or any other customs documentation in connection with the
importation of the goods;

"customs duty" means any duty or charge of any kind imposed on or in
connection with the importation of a good, including any form of surtax
or surcharge imposed on or in connection with such importation, and
does not include any:

(i) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed in accordance with
Article 2.4 (National Treatment);

(ii) duty imposed in accordance with Chapter 3 (Trade Remedies);

(411) duties applied in accordance with Articles VI, XVI and XIX of
GATT 1994, the Anti-Dumping Agreement, the SCM Agreement,
the Safeguards Agreement, Article5 of the Agreement on
Agriculture, and the DSU; and

(iv) fee or other charge imposed in accordance with Article 2.18
(Administrative Fees, Other Charges and Formalities on Imports and
Exports);

"export licensing procedures" means administrative procedures! used for

Those procedures referred to as "licensing" as well as other similar administrative procedures.

EU/VN/en 8

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

the operation of export licensing regimes requiring the submission of an
application or other documentation, other than that required for customs
purposes, to the relevant administrative body as a prior condition for
exportation from the territory of the exporting Party;

"import licensing procedures" means administrative procedures! used for
the operation of import licensing regimes requiring the submission of an
application or other documentation, other than that required for customs
purposes, to the relevant administrative body as a prior condition for
importation into the territory of the importing Party;

"non-automatic export licensing procedures" means export licensing
procedures where approval of the application is not granted for all legal
and natural persons who fulfil the requirements of the Party concerned
for engaging in export operations involving the products subject to export
licensing procedures;

"non-automatic import licensing procedures" means import licensing
procedures where approval of the application is not granted for all legal
and natural persons who fulfil the requirements of the Party concerned
for engaging in import operations involving the products subject to
import licensing procedures;

"originating" refers to the origin of a good as determined in accordance
with the rules of origin set out in Protocol 1 (Concerning the Definition
of the Concept of "Originating Products" and Methods of Administrative
Cooperation);

"performance requirement" means a requirement that:
1) a given quantity, value or percentage of goods be exported;
g q y p g g p

(41) goods of the Party granting an import licence be substituted for
imported goods;

(111) a person benefiting from an import licence purchase other goods in
the territory of the Party granting the import licence, or accord a
preference to domestically produced goods;

Those procedures referred to as "licensing" as well as other similar administrative procedures.

EU/VN/en 9

(iv) a person benefiting from an import licence produce goods in the
territory of the Party granting the import licence, with a given
quantity, value or percentage of domestic content; or

(v) relates in whatever form to the volume or value of imports, to the
volume or value of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange
inflows; and

(k) "remanufactured good" means a good classified in HS Chapter 84, 85,
87, 90 or heading 94.02, except those listed in Appendix 2-A-5 (Goods
Excluded from the Definition of Remanufactured Goods), which:

(i) 1s entirely or partially comprised of parts obtained from goods that
have been used beforehand; and

(ii) has similar performance and working conditions as well as life
expectancy compared to the original new good and is given the
same warranty as the original new good.

ARTICLE 2.4
National Treatment

Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in
accordance with Article II] of GATT 1994, including its Notes and
Supplementary Provisions. To that end, the obligations contained in Article III
of GATT 1994, including its Notes and Supplementary Provisions, are
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

ARTICLE 2.5
Classification of Goods

The classification of goods in trade between the Parties shall be in accordance
with each Party's respective tariff nomenclature in conformity with the HS.

EU/VN/en 10

ARTICLE 2.6
Remanufactured Goods

The Parties shall accord to remanufactured goods the same treatment as that
accorded to new like goods. A Party may require specific labelling of
remanufactured goods in order to prevent deception of consumers. Each Party
shall implement this Article within a transitional period of no longer than three
years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 2.7
Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties

1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, each Party shall
reduce or eliminate its customs duties on goods originating in the other Party
in accordance with its respective schedule included in Appendices 2-A-1
(Tariff Schedule of the Union) and 2-A-2 (Tariff Schedule of Viet Nam) to
Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties).

2. For the calculation of the successive reductions under paragraph 1, the
base rate for customs duties of each good shall be the one specified in the
schedules included in Appendices 2-A-1 (Tariff Schedule of the Union) and 2-
A-2 (Tariff Schedule of Viet Nam) to Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of
Customs Duties). The tariff elimination established under Appendix 2-A-2
(Tariff Schedule of Viet Nam) does not apply to used motor-vehicles under
HS headings 87.02, 87.03 and 87.04.

3. If a Party reduces an applied most-favoured-nation customs duty rate
below the rate of customs duty applied in accordance with its respective
schedule included in Appendices 2-A-1 (Tariff Schedule of the Union) and 2-
A-2 (Tariff Schedule of Viet Nam) to Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of
Customs Duties), the good originating in the other Party shall be eligible for
that lower duty rate.

4. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, a Party shall not
increase any existing customs duty applied in accordance with its respective
schedule included in Appendices 2-A-1 (Tariff Schedule of the Union) and 2-
A-2 (Tariff Schedule of Viet Nam) to Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of

EU/VN/en 11

Customs Duties), or adopt any new customs duty, on a good originating in the
other Party.

5. A Party may unilaterally accelerate the reduction or elimination of
customs duties on originating goods of the other Party applied in accordance
with its respective schedule included in Appendices 2-A-1 (Tariff Schedule of
the Union) and 2-A-2 (Tariff Schedule of Viet Nam) to Annex 2-A (Reduction
or Elimination of Customs Duties). When a Party considers such an
acceleration it shall inform the other Party as early as possible before the new
rate of customs duty takes effect. A unilateral acceleration shall not preclude
the Party from raising a customs duty to the prevailing rate at each stage of
reduction or elimination in accordance with its respective schedule included in
Appendices 2-A-1 (Tariff Schedule of the Union) and 2-A-2 (Tariff Schedule
of Viet Nam) to Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties).

6. Upon request of a Party, the Parties shall consult to consider accelerating
or broadening the scope of the reduction or elimination of customs duties
applied in accordance with their respective schedules included in Appendices
2-A-1 (Tariff Schedule of the Union) and 2-A-2 (Tariff Schedule of Viet
Nam) to Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties). If the
Parties agree to amend this Agreement in order to accelerate or broaden such
scope, any agreed amendment shall supersede any duty rate or staging
category for such good determined pursuant to their schedules. Such an
amendment shall come into effect in accordance with Article 17.5
(Amendments).

ARTICLE 2.8
Management of Administrative Errors

In the event of an error by the competent authorities in the proper management
of the preferential system at export, and in particular in the application of
Protocol 1 (Concerning the Definition of the Concept of "Originating
Products" and Methods of Administrative Cooperation), where this error leads
to consequences in terms of import duties, the importing Party may request the
Trade Committee established pursuant to Article 17.1 (Trade Committee) to
examine the possibilities of adopting appropriate measures with a view to
resolving the situation.

EU/VN/en 12

ARTICLE 2.9
Specific Measures concerning the Preferential Tariff Treatment

1. The Parties shall cooperate on combating customs violations relating to
the preferential tariff treatment granted under this Chapter.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, each Party shall offer the other Party
administrative cooperation and mutual administrative assistance in customs
and related matters as part of the implementation and control of the
preferential tariff treatment, which shall include the following obligations:

(a) verifying the originating status of the product or products concerned;

(b) carrying out the subsequent verification of the proof of origin and
providing the results of that verification to the other Party; and

(c) granting authorisation to the importing Party to conduct enquiry visits in
order to determine the authenticity of documents or accuracy of
information relevant to the granting of the preferential treatment in
question.

3. Where, in accordance with the provisions on administrative cooperation
or mutual administrative assistance in customs and related matters referred to
in paragraph 2, the importing Party establishes that a proof of origin was
unduly issued by the exporting Party because the requirements provided for in
Protocol 1 (Concerning the Definition of the Concept of "Originating
Products" and Methods of Administrative Cooperation) were not fulfilled, that
importing Party may deny a preferential tariff treatment to a declarant who
claimed it with regard to goods for which the proof of origin was issued.

4. If the importing Party considers that the denial of preferential tariff
treatment for individual consignments referred to in paragraph 3 is insufficient
to implement and control the preferential tariff treatment of a given product,
that Party may, in accordance with the procedure laid down in paragraph 5,
temporarily suspend the relevant preferential tariff treatment of the products
concerned in the following cases:

(a) when that Party finds that there has been a systematic customs violation
regarding claims for preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement; or

EU/VN/en 13

(b) when that Party finds that the exporting Party has systematically failed to
comply with the obligations under paragraph 2.

5. The competent authority of the importing Party shall, without undue
delay, notify its finding to the competent authority of the exporting Party,
provide verifiable information upon which the finding was based and engage
in consultations with the competent authority of the exporting Party with a
view to achieving a mutually acceptable solution.

6. If the competent authorities have not achieved a mutually acceptable
solution after 30 days following the notification referred to in paragraph 5, the
importing Party shall, without undue delay, refer the matter to the Trade
Committee.

7. If the Trade Committee has failed to agree on an acceptable solution
within 60 days following the referral, the importing Party may temporarily
suspend the preferential tariff treatment for the products concerned.

The importing Party may apply the temporary suspension of preferential tariff
treatment under this paragraph only for a period necessary to protect its
financial interests and until the exporting Party provides convincing evidence
of its ability to comply with the obligations referred to in paragraph 2 and to
provide sufficient control of the fulfilment of those obligations.

The temporary suspension shall not exceed a period of three months. If the
conditions that gave rise to the initial suspension persist after the expiry of the
three-month period, the importing Party may decide to renew the suspension
for another period of three months. Any suspension shall be subject to periodic
consultations within the Trade Committee.

8. The importing Party shall publish, in accordance with its internal
procedures, notices to importers of any notification and decision concerning
the temporary suspension referred to in paragraph 4. The importing Party
shall, without undue delay, notify the exporting Party and the Trade
Committee of any such notification or decision.

EU/VN/en 14

ARTICLE 2.10
Repaired Goods

1. A Party shall not apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin,
that re-enters its territory after the good has been temporarily exported from its
territory to the territory of the other Party for repair, regardless of whether
such repair could be performed in the territory of the Party from which the
good was temporarily exported.

2. Paragraph 1 does not apply to a good imported in bond, into a free trade
zone, or in similar status, that is exported for repair and is not re-imported in
bond, into a free trade zone, or in similar status.

3. A Party shall not apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin,
imported temporarily from the territory of the other Party for repair.

4. For the purposes of this Article, the term "repair" means any processing
operation which is undertaken on a good to remedy operating defects or
material damage and entailing the re-establishment of a good to its original
function, or to ensure its compliance with technical requirements for its use,
without which the good could no longer be used in the normal way for the
purposes for which it was intended. Repair of a good includes restoring and
maintenance. It shall not include an operation or process that:

(a) destroys the essential characteristics of the good or creates a new or
commercially different good;

(b) transforms an unfinished good into a finished good; or

(c) is used to improve or upgrade the technical performance of a good.

ARTICLE 2.11
Export Duties, Taxes or Other Charges

1. A Party shall not maintain or adopt any duties, taxes, or other charges of
any kind imposed on, or in connection with, the exportation of a good to the
territory of the other Party that are in excess of those imposed on like goods
destined for domestic consumption, other than in accordance with the schedule

EU/VN/en 15

included in Appendix 2-A-3 (Export Duty Schedule of Viet Nam) to Annex 2-
A (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties).

2. If a Party applies a lower rate of duty, tax or other charge on, or in
connection with, the exportation of a good, and for as long as it is lower than
the rate calculated in accordance with the schedule included in Appendix 2-A-
3 (Export Duty Schedule of Viet Nam) to Annex 2-A (Reduction or
Elimination of Customs Duties), that lower rate shall apply. This paragraph
shall not apply to more favourable treatment granted to any third country
pursuant to a preferential trade agreement.

3. At the request of either Party, the Trade Committee shall review any
duties, taxes, or other charges of any kind imposed on, or in connection with,
the exportation of goods to the territory of the other Party, when a Party has
granted more favourable treatment to any third country pursuant to a
preferential trade agreement.

ARTICLE 2.12
Agricultural Export Subsidies

1. In the multilateral context, the Parties share the objective of the parallel
elimination and prevention of the reintroduction of all forms of export
subsidies and disciplines on all export measures with equivalent effect for
agricultural goods. To that end, they shall work together with the aim of
enhancing multilateral disciplines on agricultural exporting state enterprises,
international food aid and export financing support.

2. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the exporting Party shall not
introduce or maintain any export subsidies or other measures having
equivalent effect on any agricultural good which is subject to the elimination
or reduction of customs duties by the importing Party in accordance with
Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties) and which is
destined for the territory of the importing Party.

EU/VN/en 16

ARTICLE 2.13
Administration of Trade Regulations

In accordance with Article X of GATT 1994, each Party shall administer in a
uniform, impartial and reasonable manner all its laws, regulations, judicial
decisions and administrative rulings pertaining to:

(a) the classification or the valuation of goods for customs purposes;
(b) rates of duty, taxes or other charges;

(c) requirements, restrictions or prohibitions on imports or exports;
(d) the transfer of payments; and

(e) issues affecting sale, distribution, transportation, insurance, warehousing
inspection, exhibition, processing, mixing or other use of goods for
customs purposes.

ARTICLE 2.14
Import and Export Restrictions

1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, a Party shall not
adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any good
of the other Party or on the exportation or sale for export of any good destined
for the territory of the other Party, in accordance with Article XI of GATT
1994, including its Notes and Supplementary Provisions. To that end,
Article XI of GATT 1994, including its Notes and Supplementary Provisions,
are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. Paragraph | prohibits a Party from adopting or maintaining:

(a) import licensing conditioned on the fulfilment of a performance
requirement; or

(b) voluntary export restraints.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to the goods listed in Appendix 2-A-4
(Goods to Which Viet Nam May Apply Specific Measures). Any amendment

EU/VN/en 17

of Viet Nam's laws and regulations that reduces the scope of the goods listed
in Appendix 2-A-4 (Goods to Which Viet Nam May Apply Specific
Measures) shall automatically apply under this Agreement. Any preference
accorded by Viet Nam regarding the scope of the goods listed in Appendix 2-
A-4 (Goods to Which Viet Nam May Apply Specific Measures) to any other
trading partner shall automatically apply under this Agreement. Viet Nam
shall notify the Union of any amendment or preference referred to in this
paragraph.

4. In accordance with the WTO Agreement, a Party may implement any
measure authorised by the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO against the
other Party.

5. When a Party adopts or maintains an import or export prohibition or
restriction it shall ensure full transparency thereof.

ARTICLE 2.15
Trading Rights and Related Rights for Pharmaceuticals

1. Viet Nam shall adopt and maintain appropriate legal instruments
allowing foreign pharmaceutical companies to establish foreign-invested
enterprises for the purposes of importing pharmaceuticals which have obtained
a marketing authorisation from Viet Nam's competent authorities. Without
prejudice to Viet Nam's schedules included in Annex 8-B (Viet Nam's
Schedule of Specific Commitments), such foreign-invested enterprises are
allowed to sell pharmaceuticals which they have legally imported to
distributors or wholesalers who have the right to distribute pharmaceuticals in
Viet Nam.

2. The foreign-invested enterprises referred to in paragraph 1 are allowed
to:

(a) build their own warehouses to store pharmaceuticals which they have
legally imported into Viet Nam in accordance with the regulations issued
by the Ministry of Health, or its successor;

(b) provide information relating to pharmaceuticals, which they have legally
imported into Viet Nam, to health care professionals in accordance with

EU/VN/en 18

the regulations issued by the Ministry of Health, or its successor, and
Viet Nam's other competent authorities; and

(c) carry out clinical studies and testing pursuant to Article 3 (International
Standards) of Annex 2-C (Pharmaceutical/Medicinal Products and
Medical Devices) and in accordance with the regulations issued by the
Ministry of Health, or its successor, to ensure that the pharmaceuticals
which they have legally imported into Viet Nam are suitable for domestic
consumption.

ARTICLE 2.16
Import Licensing Procedures

1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the Import Licensing
Agreement.

2. Each Party shall notify the other Party of its existing import licensing
procedures, including the legal basis and the relevant official website, within
30 days of the entry into force of this Agreement unless they were already
notified or provided under Article 5 or paragraph 3 of Article 7 of the Import
Licensing Agreement. The notification shall contain the same information as
referred to in Article 5 or paragraph 3 of Article 7 of the Import Licensing
Agreement.

3. Each Party shall notify the other Party of any introduction or
modification of any import licensing procedure which it intends to adopt no
later than 45 days before the new procedure or modification takes effect. In no
case shall a Party provide such notification later than 60 days following the
date of the publication of the introduction or modification unless this was
already notified in accordance with Article 5 of the Import Licensing
Agreement. The notification shall contain the same information as referred to
in Article 5 of the Import Licensing Agreement.

4. Each Party shall publish on an official website any information that it is
required to publish pursuant to subparagraph 4(a) of Article 1 of the Import
Licensing Agreement.

5. Upon request of a Party, the other Party shall respond within 60 days to a

EU/VN/en 19

reasonable enquiry regarding any import licensing procedure which it intends
to adopt or has adopted or maintained, as well as the criteria for granting or for
allocating import licences, including the eligibility of persons, firms, and
institutions to make such an application, the administrative body or bodies to
be approached and the list of products subject to the import licensing
requirement.

6. The Parties shall introduce and administer import licensing procedures in
accordance with:

(a) paragraphs 1 to 9 of Article 1 of the Import Licensing Agreement;
(b) Article 2 of the Import Licensing Agreement; and
(c) Article 3 of the Import Licensing Agreement.

To that end, the provisions referred to in subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) are
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

7. A Party shall only adopt or maintain automatic import licensing
procedures as a condition for importation into its territory in order to fulfil
legitimate objectives after having conducted an appropriate impact
assessment.

8. A Party shall grant import licences for an appropriate length of time
which shall not be shorter than set out in the domestic legislation providing for
the import licensing requirements and which shall not preclude imports.

9. Where a Party has denied an import licence application with respect to a
good of the other Party, it shall, upon request of the applicant and promptly
after receiving the request, provide the applicant with a written explanation of
the reasons for the denial. The applicant shall have the right of appeal or
review in accordance with the domestic legislation or procedures of the
importing Party.

10. The Parties shall only adopt or maintain non-automatic import licensing
procedures in order to implement a measure that is not inconsistent with this
Agreement, including with Article 2.22 (General Exceptions). A Party
adopting non-automatic import licensing procedures shall indicate clearly the
purpose of such licensing procedures.

EU/VN/en 20

ARTICLE 2.17
Export Licensing Procedures

1. Each Party shall notify the other Party of its existing export licensing
procedures, including the legal basis and the relevant official website, within
30 days of the entry into force of this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall notify the other Party of any introduction or
modification of any export licensing procedure which it intends to adopt no
later than 45 days before the new procedure or modification takes effect. In no
case shall a Party provide such notification later than 60 days following the
date of the publication of the introduction or modification.

3. The notification referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall contain the
following information:

(a) the texts of its export licensing procedures, including any modifications;
(b) the products subject to each export licensing procedure;
(c) for each export licensing procedure, a description of:

(i) the process for applying for an export licence; and

(41) the criteria which an applicant must meet to be eligible to apply for
an export licence;

(d) the contact point or points from which interested persons can obtain
further information on the conditions for obtaining an export licence;

(e) the administrative body or bodies to which an application or other
relevant documentation shall be submitted;

(f) the period during which each export licensing procedure will be in effect;

(g) if the Party intends to use an export licensing procedure to administer an
export quota, the overall quantity and, where practicable, value of the
quota and the opening and closing dates of the quota; and

(h) any exceptions or derogations from an export licensing requirement, how
to request those exceptions or derogations, and the criteria for granting

EU/VN/en 21

them.

4. Each Party shall publish any export licensing procedure, including the
legal basis and a reference to the relevant official website. Each Party shall
also publish any new export licensing procedure, or any modification to its
export licensing procedures, as soon as possible but in any case no later than
45 days after its adoption and at least 25 working days before its entry into
force.

5. Upon request of a Party, the other Party shall respond within 60 days to a
reasonable enquiry regarding any export licensing procedures which it intends
to adopt or which it has adopted or maintained as well as the criteria for
granting or for allocating export licences, including the eligibility of persons,
firms, and institutions to make such an application, the administrative body or
bodies to be approached, and the list of products subject to the export
licensing requirement.

6. The Parties shall introduce and administer any export licensing
procedures in accordance with:

(a) paragraphs 1 to 9 of Article 1 of the Import Licensing Agreement;
(b) Article 2 of the Import Licensing Agreement;

(c) Article 3 of the Import Licensing Agreement with the exception of
subparagraphs 5(a), (c), (j) and (k).

To that end, the provisions of the Import Licensing Agreement referred to in
subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) are incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

7. Each Party shall ensure that all export licensing procedures are neutral in
application and administered in a fair, equitable, non-discriminatory and
transparent manner.

8. A Party shall grant export licences for an appropriate length of time
which shall not be shorter than set out in the domestic legislation providing for
the export licensing requirement and which shall not preclude exports.

9. When a Party has denied an export licence application with respect to a
good of the other Party, it shall, upon request of the applicant and promptly

EU/VN/en 22

after receiving the request, provide the applicant with a written explanation of
the reasons for the denial. The applicant shall have the right of appeal or
review in accordance with the domestic legislation or procedures of the
exporting Party.

10. A Party shall only adopt or maintain automatic export licensing
procedures as a condition for exportation from its territory in order to fulfil
legitimate objectives after having conducted an appropriate impact
assessment.

11. The Parties shall only adopt or maintain non-automatic export licensing
procedures in order to implement a measure that is not inconsistent with this
Agreement, including with Article 2.22 (General Exceptions). A Party
adopting non-automatic export licensing procedures shall indicate clearly the
purpose of such licensing procedures.

ARTICLE 2.18

Administrative Fees, Other Charges and Formalities on Imports and
Exports

1. Each Party shall ensure that fees, charges, formalities and requirements,
other than import and export customs duties and measures listed in
subparagraphs (d)(i), (11) and (a1) of Article 2.3 (Definitions), are consistent
with the Parties' obligations under Article VIII of GATT 1994, including its
Notes and Supplementary Provisions.

2. A Party shall only impose fees and charges for services provided in
connection with importation and exportation of goods. Fees and charges shall
not be levied on an ad valorem basis and shall not exceed the approximate
cost of the service provided. Each Party shall publish information on fees and
charges it imposes in connection with the importation and exportation of
goods in accordance with Article 4.10 (Fees and Charges).

3. A Party shall not require consular transactions, including related fees and
charges, in connection with the importation or exportation of goods. After
three years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, a Party shall
not require consular authentication for the importation of goods covered by

EU/VN/en 23

this Agreement.

ARTICLE 2.19
Origin Marking

Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, when Viet Nam applies
mandatory country of origin marking requirements to non-agricultural
products of the Union, Viet Nam shall accept the marking "Made in EU", or a
similar marking in the local language, as fulfilling such requirements.

ARTICLE 2.20
State Trading Enterprises

1. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations under Article
XVII of GATT 1994, including its Notes and Supplementary Provisions, and
the WTO Understanding on the Interpretation of Article XVII of GATT 1994,
which are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis.

2. When a Party requests information from the other Party on individual
cases of state trading enterprises and on their operations, including
information on their bilateral trade, the requested Party shall ensure
transparency subject to subparagraph 4(d) of Article XVII of GATT 1994.

ARTICLE 2.21
Elimination of Sector-Specific Non-Tariff Measures

1. The Parties shall implement their commitments on sector-specific non-
tariff measures on goods as set out in Annexes 2-B (Motor Vehicles and
Motor Vehicles Parts and Equipment) and 2-C (Pharmaceutical/Medicinal
Products and Medical Devices).

2. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, 10 years after the

EU/VN/en 24

entry into force of this Agreement and upon request of either Party, the Parties
shall, in accordance with their internal procedures, enter into negotiations with
the aim of broadening the scope of their commitments on sector-specific non-
tariff measures on goods.

ARTICLE 2.22
General Exceptions

1. Nothing in this Chapter prevents either Party from taking measures in
accordance with Article XX of GATT 1994, including its Notes and
Supplementary Provisions, which are incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. The Parties understand that before taking any measures provided for in
subparagraphs (i) and (j) of Article XX of GATT 1994, the exporting Party
intending to take such measures shall provide the other Party with all relevant
information. Upon request of either Party, the Parties shall consult with a view
to seeking an acceptable solution. The Parties may agree on any means needed
to resolve the difficulties. If prior information or examination 1s impossible
due to exceptional and critical circumstances requiring immediate action, the
exporting Party may apply the necessary precautionary measures and shall
immediately inform the other Party thereof.

ARTICLE 2.23
Committee on Trade in Goods

1. The Committee on Trade in Goods established pursuant to Article 17.2
(Specialised Committees) shall comprise representatives of the Parties.

2. The Committee on Trade in Goods shall consider any matter arising
under this Chapter and Protocol 1 (Concerning the Definition of the Concept
of "Originating Products" and Methods of Administrative Cooperation).

3. The Committee on Trade in Goods shall carry out the following tasks in
accordance with Article 17.2 (Specialised Committees):

EU/VN/en 25

(a) reviewing and monitoring the implementation and operation of the
provisions referred to in paragraph 2;

(b) identifying and recommending measures to resolve any difference that
may arise, and to promote, facilitate and improve market access,
including any acceleration of tariff commitments under Article 2.7
(Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties);

(c) recommending the Trade Committee to establish working groups, as it
deems necessary;

(d) undertaking any additional work that the Trade Committee may assign;
and

(e) proposing decisions to be adopted by the Trade Committee for amending
the list of fragrant rice varieties included in subparagraph 5(c) of Sub-
Section 1 (Union Tariff Rate Quotas) of Section B (Tariff Rate Quotas)
of Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties).

CHAPTER 3

TRADE REMEDIES

SECTION A

ANTI-DUMPING AND COUNTERVAILING DUTIES

ARTICLE 3.1
General Provisions

1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under Article VI of GATT
1994, the Anti-Dumping Agreement, and the SCM Agreement.

2. The Parties, recognising that anti-dumping and countervailing measures
can be abused to obstruct trade, agree that:

EU/VN/en 26

(a) trade remedies should be used in full compliance with the relevant WTO
requirements and should be based on a fair and transparent system; and

(b) careful consideration should be given to the interests of the other Party
when a Party considers imposing such measures.

3. For the purposes of this Section, origin shall be determined in accordance
with Article 1 of the Agreement on Rules of Origin.

ARTICLE 3.2
Transparency

1. Without prejudice to Article 6.5 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement and
Article 12.4 of the SCM Agreement, the Parties shall ensure, immediately
after any imposition of provisional measures and in any case before the final
determination is made, full and meaningful disclosure to interested parties of
all essential facts and considerations which form the basis for the decision to
apply measures. Disclosures shall be made in writing and allow interested
parties sufficient time to make their comments.

2. Provided it does not unnecessarily delay the conduct of the investigation,
interested parties shall be granted the possibility to be heard in order to
express their views during trade remedies investigations.

ARTICLE 3.3
Consideration of Public Interest

A Party shall not impose anti-dumping or countervailing measures where, on
the basis of the information made available during the investigation, it can
clearly be concluded that it is not in the public interest to apply such measures.
In determining the public interest, the Party shall take into account the
situation of the domestic industry, importers and their representative
associations, representative users and representative consumer organisations,
based on the relevant information provided to the investigating authorities.

EU/VN/en 27

ARTICLE 3.4
Lesser Duty Rule

An anti-dumping or countervailing duty imposed by a Party shall not exceed
the margin of dumping or countervailable subsidy, and the Party shall
endeavour to ensure that the amount of this duty is less than that margin if
such lesser duty would be adequate to remove the injury to the domestic
industry.

ARTICLE 3.5
Exclusion from Dispute Settlement

The provisions of this Section shall not be subject to Chapter 15 (Dispute
Settlement).

SECTION B

GLOBAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES

ARTICLE 3.6
General Provisions

1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under Article XIX of
GATT 1994, the Safeguards Agreement and Article 5 of the Agreement on
Agriculture.

2. A Party shall not apply with respect to the same good at the same time:

(a) a bilateral safeguard measure under Section C (Bilateral Safeguard
Clause) of this Chapter; and

(b) a measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards
Agreement.

EU/VN/en 28

3. For the purposes of this Section, origin shall be determined in accordance
with Article 1 of the Agreement on Rules of Origin.

ARTICLE 3.7
Transparency

1. Notwithstanding Article 3.6 (General Provisions), the Party initiating a
global safeguard investigation or intending to impose global safeguard
measures shall immediately provide, at the request of the other Party and
provided that it has a substantial interest, ad hoc written notification of all
pertinent information leading to the initiation of a global safeguard
investigation and, as the case may be, the proposal to impose the global
safeguard measures, including on the provisional findings, where relevant.
This is without prejudice to Article 3.2 of the Safeguards Agreement.

2. When imposing global safeguard measures, the Parties shall endeavour to
impose them in a way that least affects bilateral trade.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, if a Party considers that the legal
requirements for the imposition of definitive safeguard measures are met, it
shall notify the other Party and give the possibility to hold bilateral
consultations. If no satisfactory solution has been reached within 30 days of
the notification, the Party may adopt the definitive global safeguard measures.
The possibility to hold consultations should be offered to the other Party in
order to exchange views on the information referred to in paragraph 1.

ARTICLE 3.8
Exclusion from Dispute Settlement

The provisions of this Section referring to WTO rights and obligations shall
not be subject to Chapter 15 (Dispute Settlement).

EU/VN/en 29

SECTION C

BILATERAL SAFEGUARD CLAUSE

ARTICLE 3.9
Definitions
For the purposes of this Section:

(a) "domestic industry" shall be understood in accordance with subparagraph
l(c) of Article 4 of the Safeguards Agreement; to that end, subparagraph
l(c) of Article 4 of the Safeguards Agreement is incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis;

(b) "serious injury" and "threat of serious injury" shall be understood in
accordance with subparagraphs l(a) and l(b) of Article 4 of the
Safeguards Agreement; to that end subparagraphs 1(a) and 1(b) of Article
4 of the Safeguards Agreement are incorporated into and made part of
this Agreement, mutatis mutandis; and

(c) "transition period" means a period of 10 years from the entry into force of
this Agreement.

ARTICLE 3.10
Application of a Bilateral Safeguard Measure

1. If, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this
Agreement, any good originating in the territory of a Party is being imported
into the territory of the other Party in such increased quantities, in absolute
terms or relative to domestic production, and under such conditions as to cause
or threaten to cause serious injury to a domestic industry producing like or
directly competitive goods, the importing Party may adopt measures provided
for in paragraph 2 in accordance with the conditions and procedures laid down
in this Section during the transition period only, except as otherwise provided
for in subparagraph 6(c) of Article 3.11 (Conditions and Limitations).

EU/VN/en 30

2. The importing Party may impose a bilateral safeguard measure which:

(a) suspends the further reduction of the rate of customs duty on the good
concerned as provided for in Annex 2-A (Elimination of Customs
Duties); or

(b) increases the rate of customs duty on the good to a level which does not
exceed the lesser of:

(i) the most-favoured-nation applied rate of customs duty on the good
in effect at the time the measure is taken; or

(11) the base rate of customs duty specified in the schedules included in
Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties) pursuant
to Article 2.7 (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties).

ARTICLE 3.11
Conditions and Limitations

1. A Party shall only apply a bilateral safeguard measure following an
investigation by its competent authorities in accordance with Article 3 and
subparagraph 2(c) of Article 4 of the Safeguards Agreement. To that end,
Article 3 and subparagraph 2(c) of Article 4 of the Safeguards Agreement are
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. A Party shall notify the other Party in writing of the initiation of the
investigation referred to in paragraph | and consult with the other Party as far
as practicable in advance of applying a bilateral safeguard measure, with a
view to reviewing the information arising from the investigation and
exchanging views on the measure.

3. In the investigation referred to in paragraph 1, the Party shall comply
with the requirements of subparagraph 2(a) of Article 4 of the Safeguards
Agreement. To that end, subparagraph 2(a) of Article 4 of the Safeguards
Agreement is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis.

4. The investigation shall also demonstrate, on the basis of objective

EU/VN/en 31

evidence, the existence of a causal link between increased imports and the
serious injury or threat thereof. The investigation shall also take into
consideration the existence of any factor other than increased imports which
may also cause injury at the same time.

5. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities complete the
investigation referred to in paragraph 1 within one year of the date of its
initiation.

6. A Party shall not apply a bilateral safeguard measure:

(a) except to the extent, and for such time, as it is necessary to prevent or
remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment;

(b) fora period exceeding two years, except that the period may be extended
by up to two years if the competent authorities of the importing Party
determine, in conformity with the procedures set out in this Article, that
the measure continues to be necessary to prevent or remedy serious
injury and to facilitate adjustment and that there is evidence that the
industry is adjusting, provided that the total period of application of a
safeguard measure, including the period of initial application and any
extension thereof, does not exceed four years; or

(c) beyond the expiration of the transition period, except with the consent of
the other Party.

7. In order to facilitate adjustment in a situation where the expected
duration of a bilateral safeguard measure is more than two years, the Party
applying the measure shall progressively liberalise the measure at regular
intervals during the period of application.

8. When a Party terminates a bilateral safeguard measure, the rate of
customs duty shall be the rate that, according to its schedule included in
Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties), would have been in
effect but for the measure.

EU/VN/en 32

ARTICLE 3.12
Provisional Measures

In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage that would be
difficult to repair, a Party may apply a bilateral safeguard measure on a
provisional basis pursuant to a preliminary determination that there is clear
evidence that imports of an originating good from the other Party have
increased as the result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under
this Agreement, and that such imports cause serious injury, or threat thereof,
to the domestic industry. The duration of any provisional measure shall not
exceed 200 days, during which time the Party shall comply with the
requirements of paragraphs 1 and 3 of Article 3.11 (Conditions and
Limitations). The Party shall promptly refund any tariff increases if the
investigation referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 3.11 (Conditions and
Limitations) does not result in a finding that the requirements of paragraph 1
of Article 3.10 (Application of a Bilateral Safeguard Measure) are met. The
duration of any provisional measure shall be counted as part of the period set
out in subparagraph 6(b) of Article 3.11 (Conditions and Limitations).

ARTICLE 3.13
Compensation

1. A Party applying a bilateral safeguard measure shall consult with the
other Party in order to mutually agree on appropriate trade-liberalising
compensation in the form of concessions having trade effects substantially
equivalent to the bilateral safeguard measure or in the form of concessions
equivalent to the value of the additional duties expected to result from the
safeguard measure. The Party applying a bilateral safeguard measure shall
provide an opportunity for such consultations no later than 30 days after the
application of the bilateral safeguard measure.

2. If the consultations under paragraph | do not result in an agreement on
trade-liberalising compensation within 30 days of the beginning of the
consultations, the Party whose goods are subject to the bilateral safeguard
measure may suspend the application of concessions, with respect to
originating goods of the Party applying the bilateral safeguard measure, which

EU/VN/en 33

have trade effects substantially equivalent to the bilateral safeguard measure.
The obligation to provide compensation, incumbent on the Party applying the
bilateral safeguard measure, and the other Party's right to suspend concessions
under this paragraph shall terminate on the same date as the bilateral safeguard
measure terminates.

3. The right of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall not be exercised
for the first 24 months during which a bilateral safeguard measure is in effect,
provided that the safeguard measure conforms to the provisions of this
Agreement.

ARTICLE 3.14
Use of the English Language

In order to ensure the maximum efficiency for the application of the trade
remedy rules under this Chapter, the investigating authorities of the Parties
shall use the English language as a basis for communications and documents
exchanged in the context of trade remedy investigations between the Parties.

CHAPTER 4

CUSTOMS AND TRADE FACILITATION

ARTICLE 4.1
Objectives

1. The Parties recognise the importance of customs and trade facilitation
matters in the evolving global trading environment. The Parties shall reinforce
cooperation in this area with a view to ensuring that their respective customs
legislation and procedures fulfil the objectives of promoting trade facilitation
while ensuring effective customs control.

2. The Parties agree that their legislation shall be non-discriminatory and
that customs procedures shall be based on the use of modern methods and

EU/VN/en 34

effective controls to combat fraud and to promote legitimate trade.

3.

The Parties recognise that legitimate public policy objectives, including

those in relation to security, safety and the fight against fraud, shall not be

compromised.

I.

ARTICLE 4.2
Customs Cooperation and Mutual Administrative Assistance

The respective authorities of the Parties shall cooperate on customs

matters in order to ensure that the objectives set out in Article 4.1 (Objectives)

are attained.

2.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

The Parties shall enhance customs cooperation, inter alia, by:

exchanging information concerning customs legislation, its
implementation, and customs procedures, in particular in the following
areas:

(i) simplification and modernisation of customs procedures;

(1) border enforcement of intellectual property rights by the customs
authorities;

(111) facilitation of transit movements and transhipment; and
(iv) relations with the business community;

exploring joint initiatives relating to import, export and other customs
procedures, including technical assistance, in order to ensure effective
services to the business community;

strengthening their cooperation in the field of customs in international
organisations such as the WTO and the World Customs Organisation
(hereinafter referred to as "WCO"); and

establishing, where relevant and appropriate, mutual recognition of trade
partnership programmes and customs controls, including equivalent trade
facilitation measures.

EU/VN/en 35

3. The Parties shall provide each other with mutual administrative
assistance in customs matters in accordance with Protocol 2 (On Mutual
Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters).

ARTICLE 4.3
Customs Legislation and Procedures

1. The Parties shall base their respective customs legislation and procedures
on international instruments and standards applicable in the area of customs
and trade, including the substantive elements of the International Convention
on the Simplification and Harmonisation of Customs Procedures, as amended
(Revised Kyoto Convention), done at Brussels on 26 June 1999, the
International Convention on the Harmonised Commodity Description and
Coding System (hereinafter referred to as "HS Convention"), the Framework
of Standards to Secure and Facilitate Global Trade and the Customs Data
Model of the WCO.

2. The customs legislation and procedures of the Parties shall:

(a) aim at the protection of legitimate trade through effective enforcement
and compliance with legislative requirements;

(b) avoid unnecessary or discriminatory burdens on economic operators, and
provide for further facilitation for operators with high levels of
compliance; and

(c) ensure safeguards against fraud and illicit or damaging activities.

3. The Parties agree that their respective customs legislation and
procedures, including remedies, shall be proportionate and non-discriminatory
and that their application shall not unduly delay the release of goods.

4. In order to improve working methods, as well as to ensure non-
discrimination, transparency, efficiency, integrity and accountability of
operations, the Parties shall:

(a) simplify and review requirements and formalities, wherever possible,
with respect to the rapid release and clearance of goods; and

EU/VN/en 36

(b) work towards further simplification and standardisation of data and
documentation required by customs or other agencies.

ARTICLE 4.4
Release of Goods

1. Each Party shall ensure that its customs authorities apply requirements
and procedures that provide for the release of goods within a period no longer
than that required to ensure compliance with its customs and other trade-
related laws and formalities. Each Party shall work towards further reducing
this period and releasing the goods without undue delay.

2. The Parties shall allow, inter alia, the release of goods without the
payment of customs duties, subject to the provision of a guarantee if required
in accordance with their legislation in order to secure the final payment of
customs duties.

3. Each Party shall ensure that its customs authorities provide for advance
electronic submission and further processing of information before the
physical arrival of goods (pre-arrival processing) to enable the release of
goods on arrival.

ARTICLE 4.5
Simplified Customs Procedures

1. Each Party shall provide for simplified customs procedures that are
transparent and efficient in order to reduce costs and increase predictability for
economic operators, including for small and medium-sized enterprises. Easier
access to customs simplifications shall also be provided for authorised traders
according to objective and non-discriminatory criteria.

2. A single administrative document or electronic equivalent shall be used
for the purposes of completing the formalities required for placing the goods
under a customs procedure.

3. The Parties shall apply modern customs techniques, including risk

EU/VN/en 37

assessment and post-clearance audit methods, in order to simplify and
facilitate the entry and the release of goods.

4. The Parties shall promote the progressive development and use of
systems, including those based on information technology, to facilitate the
electronic exchange of data between traders, customs administrations and
other related agencies.

ARTICLE 4.6
Transit and Transhipment

1. Each Party shall ensure the facilitation and effective control of
transhipment operations and transit movements through its territory.

2. To facilitate traffic in transit each Party shall ensure cooperation and
coordination between all authorities and agencies concerned in its territory.

ARTICLE 4.7
Risk Management

1. Each Party shall base its examination and release procedures and its post-
clearance audit procedures on risk assessment principles and audits, rather
than examining each shipment in a comprehensive manner for compliance
with all import requirements.

2. The Parties shall adopt and apply their import, export, transit and
transhipment control requirements and procedures for goods on the basis of
risk management principles which shall be applied to focus compliance
measures on transactions that merit attention.

ARTICLE 4.8
Transparency

1. Each Party shall ensure that its customs and other trade-related laws,

EU/VN/en 38

regulations and general administrative procedures and other requirements,
including fees and charges, are readily available to interested parties and,
where feasible and possible, on an official website.

2. Each Party shall designate or maintain one or more inquiry or
information points to address, within a reasonable time, inquiries by interested
parties concerning customs and other trade-related matters.

ARTICLE 4.9
Advance Rulings

1. Upon written request from traders, the customs authorities of each Party
shall issue, in accordance with its laws and regulations, prior to the
importation of a good into its territory, written advance rulings on tariff
classification or on any other matter that the Parties may agree upon.

2. Subject to any confidentiality requirements in each Party's laws and
regulations, each Party shall publish, for example on an official website, its
advance rulings on tariff classification and on any matters that the Parties may
agree upon.

3. With a view to facilitating trade, the Parties shall include in their bilateral
dialogue regular updates on changes in their respective laws and regulations
on advance rulings.

ARTICLE 4.10
Fees and Charges

1. Each Party shall publish information on fees and charges via an officially
designated medium, and where feasible and possible, on an official website.
This information shall include the fees and charges that will be applied, the
reason for the fees or charges for the service provided, the responsible
authority, and when and how payment is to be made.

2. Each Party shall not impose new or amended fees and charges until the
information in accordance with paragraph 1 is published and made readily

EU/VN/en 39

available.

ARTICLE 4.11
Customs Brokers

The Parties shall not require in their respective customs legislation and
procedures the mandatory use of customs brokers. The Parties shall apply
transparent, non-discriminatory and proportionate rules if and when licensing
customs brokers.

ARTICLE 4.12
Customs Valuation

1. The Parties shall determine the customs value of goods in accordance
with Article VI of GATT 1994 and the Customs Valuation Agreement.

2. The Parties shall cooperate with a view to reaching a common approach
to issues relating to customs valuation.

ARTICLE 4.13
Preshipment Inspections

The Parties agree that their respective customs legislation and procedures shall
not require the mandatory use of preshipment inspections as defined in the
Agreement on Preshipment Inspection, or any other inspection activity
performed at destination, before customs clearance, by private companies.

ARTICLE 4.14
Review and Appeal

Each Party shall provide effective, prompt, non-discriminatory and easily

EU/VN/en 40

accessible procedures to guarantee the right of appeal against customs and
other agency administrative actions, rulings and decisions affecting
importation or exportation of goods or goods in transit.

ARTICLE 4.15

Relations with the Business Community

The Parties agree:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

on the need for timely consultations with trade representatives on
legislative proposals and general procedures related to customs and trade
facilitation matters. To that end, appropriate consultations between
administrations and the business community shall be held by each Party;

to publish or otherwise make available, as far as possible through
electronic means, any new legislation and general procedures related to
customs and trade facilitation matters prior to the application of any such
legislation and procedures, as well as changes to and interpretations of
such legislation and procedures; they shall also make publicly available
relevant notices of an administrative nature, including agency
requirements and entry procedures, hours of operation and operating
procedures for customs offices at ports and border crossing points, and
contact points for information enquiries;

on the need for a reasonable time period between the publication of new
or amended legislation, procedures and fees or charges and their entry
into force; and

to ensure that their respective customs and related requirements and
procedures continue to meet the needs of the business community, follow
best practices, and remain as little trade-restrictive as possible.

ARTICLE 4.16
Committee on Customs

The Committee on Customs established by Article 17.2 (Specialised

EU/VN/en 41

Committees) shall be composed of representatives of the Parties.

2. The Committee on Customs shall ensure the proper functioning of this
Chapter, the enforcement of intellectual property rights by customs in
accordance with Sub-Section 4 (Border Enforcement) of Section C
(Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights) of Chapter 12 (Intellectual
Property), Protocol 1 (Concerning the Definition of the Concept of
"Originating Products" and Methods of Administrative Cooperation), Protocol
2 (On Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters) and any
additional provisions relating to customs that the Parties may agree upon.

3. The Committee on Customs shall examine the need for, and adopt,
decisions, opinions, proposals or recommendations on all issues arising from
the implementation of the provisions referred to in paragraph 2. It shall have
the power to adopt decisions on mutual recognition of risk management
techniques, risk criteria and standards, security controls and trade partnership
programmes, including aspects such as data transmission and mutually agreed
benefits.

CHAPTER 5

TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE

ARTICLE 5.1
Affirmation of the TBT Agreement

The Parties affirm their rights and obligations with respect to each other under
the TBT Agreement, which is incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

ARTICLE 5.2
Objectives

1. The objectives of this Chapter are to facilitate and increase bilateral trade

EU/VN/en 42

in goods by preventing, identifying and eliminating unnecessary obstacles to
trade within the scope of the TBT Agreement, and to enhance bilateral
cooperation between the Parties.

2. The Parties shall establish and enhance technical capabilities and
institutional infrastructure on matters concerning technical barriers to trade.

ARTICLE 5.3
Scope and Definitions

1. This Chapter applies to the preparation, adoption and application of
standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, as
defined in Annex 1 to the TBT Agreement, that may affect trade in goods
between the Parties, except for:

(a) purchasing specifications prepared by governmental bodies for
production or consumption requirements of those bodies; or

(b) sanitary and phytosanitary measures as defined in Annex A to the SPS
Agreement.

2. Each Party has the right to prepare, adopt and apply standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures in accordance with this
Chapter and the TBT Agreement.

3. For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions of Annex | to the TBT
Agreement apply.

ARTICLE 5.4
Technical Regulations

1. Each Party shall make best use of good regulatory practice, as provided
for in the TBT Agreement and in this Chapter, in particular, by:

(a) assessing the available regulatory and non-regulatory alternatives to a
proposed technical regulation that would fulfil the Party's legitimate

EU/VN/en 43

(b)

(c)

(d)

2.

objectives, in accordance with Article 2.2 of the TBT Agreement, and
endeavouring to assess, inter alia, the impact of a proposed technical
regulation by means of a regulatory impact assessment, as recommended
by the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade established under
Article 13 of the TBT Agreement;

using relevant international standards, such as those developed by the
International Organisation for Standardisation, the International
Electrotechnical Commission, the International Telecommunication
Union and the Codex Alimentarius Commission, as a basis for their
technical regulations, except when such international standards would be
ineffective or inappropriate for the fulfilment of the legitimate objectives
pursued by a Party; when a Party has not used international standards as a
basis for its technical regulations, it shall, upon request of the other Party,
identify any substantial deviation from the relevant international
standards and explain the reasons why those standards have been judged
inappropriate or ineffective for the objective pursued;

reviewing, without prejudice to Article 2.3 of the TBT Agreement,
technical regulations with a view to increasing their convergence with
relevant international standards. In undertaking this review, the Parties
shall, inter alia, take into account any new development in the relevant
international standards and whether the circumstances that have given
rise to divergences from any relevant international standard continue to
exist;

specifying technical regulations based on product performance
requirements, rather than on design or descriptive characteristics.

In accordance with Article 2.7 of the TBT Agreement, a Party shall give

favourable consideration to accepting as equivalent technical regulations of
the other Party, even if those regulations differ from its own, provided it is

satisfied that those regulations adequately fulfil the objectives of its own
regulations.

3.

A Party that has prepared a technical regulation that it considers to be

equivalent to a technical regulation of the other Party because it has a
compatible objective and product scope may request in writing that the other
Party recognise it as equivalent. That request shall be made in writing and set

EU/VN/en 44

out in detail the reasons why the technical regulations should be considered to
be equivalent, including reasons with respect to product scope. A Party which
does not agree that the technical regulations are equivalent shall provide to the
other Party, upon request, the reasons for its decision.

ARTICLE 5.5
Standards

1. The Parties affirm their obligations under Article 4.1 of the TBT
Agreement to ensure that their standardising bodies accept and comply with
the Code of Good Practice for the Preparation, Adoption and Application of
Standards in Annex 3 to the TBT Agreement. The Parties further affirm their
adherence to the principles set out in Decisions and Recommendations
adopted by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade since 1
January 1995, G/TBT/1/rev.13 of 8 March 2017, including the Decision of the
Committee on Principles for the Development of International Standards,
Guides and Recommendations with relation to Articles 2, 5 and Annex 3 of the
Agreement, referred to in the Annexes to Part 1 of the document.

2. With a view to harmonising standards on as wide a basis as possible, the
Parties shall encourage their standardising bodies as well as the regional
standardising bodies of which they or their standardising bodies are members
to:

(a) participate, within the limits of their resources, in the preparation of
international standards by relevant international standardising bodies;

(b) use relevant international standards as a basis for the standards they
develop, except where those international standards would be ineffective
or inappropriate for the fulfilment of the legitimate objectives pursued by
a Party, for instance because of an insufficient level of protection,
fundamental climatic or geographical factors, or fundamental
technological problems;

(c) avoid duplication of, or overlap with, the work of international
standardising bodies;

(d) review national and regional standards not based on relevant international

EU/VN/en 45

standards at regular intervals, with a view to increasing their convergence
with relevant international standards; and

(e) cooperate with the relevant standardisation bodies of the other Party in
international standardisation activities. That cooperation may be
undertaken in international standardising bodies or at regional level.

3. The Parties shall exchange information on:
(a) their use of standards in support of technical regulations;

(b) their standardisation processes, and the extent of their use of international
or regional standards as basis for their national standards; and

(c) cooperation agreements on standardisation implemented by either Party,
including on standardisation issues in international agreements with third
countries, to the extent this is not explicitly prohibited by those
agreements.

4. The Parties recognise that in accordance with Annex | to the TBT
Agreement, compliance with standards is voluntary. When a Party makes
compliance with standards mandatory, through incorporation or referencing in
technical regulations or conformity assessment procedures, Article 5.7
(Transparency) applies.

ARTICLE 5.6
Conformity Assessment Procedures

1. In respect of mandatory conformity assessment procedures the Parties
shall apply paragraph 1 of Article 5.4 (Technical Regulations), mutatis
mutandis, with a view to avoiding unnecessary obstacles to trade and ensuring
transparency and non-discrimination.

2. In line with Article 5.1.2 of the TBT Agreement, when an importing
Party requires positive assurance of conformity with its applicable technical
regulations or standards, its conformity assessment procedures shall neither be
stricter nor applied more strictly than necessary to give that Party adequate
confidence that products conform with its applicable technical regulations or
standards, taking account of the risks non-conformity would create.

EU/VN/en 46

3.

The Parties recognise that a broad range of mechanisms exists to

facilitate the acceptance of the results of conformity assessment procedures
conducted in the territory of the other Party, including:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

4.

the importing Party's reliance on a supplier's declaration of conformity;

agreements on mutual acceptance of the results of conformity assessment
procedures with respect to specific technical regulations conducted by
bodies located in the territory of the other Party;

use of accreditation to qualify conformity assessment bodies located in
the territory of either Party;

government designation of conformity assessment bodies, including
bodies located in the territory of the other Party;

unilateral recognition by a Party of the results of conformity assessment
procedures conducted in the territory of the other Party;

voluntary arrangements between conformity assessment bodies located in
the territory of either Party; and

use of regional and international multilateral recognition agreements and
arrangements to which the Parties are party.

Having regard in particular to the considerations referred to in paragraph

3, the Parties shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

intensify their exchange of information on the mechanism referred to in
paragraph 3 and on similar mechanisms with a view to facilitating the
acceptance of conformity assessment results;

exchange information on conformity assessment procedures and, in
particular, on the criteria used to select appropriate conformity
assessment procedures for specific products;

consider a supplier's declaration of conformity as one of the assurances of
conformity with domestic law;

consider arrangements on mutual acceptance of the results of conformity
assessment procedures according to the procedure set out in paragraph 5;

EU/VN/en 47

(e) exchange information on accreditation policy and to consider how to best
make use of international standards for accreditation and of international
agreements involving the Parties' accreditation bodies, for example,
through the mechanisms of the International Laboratory Accreditation
Cooperation and the International Accreditation Forum;

(f) consider joining or, as applicable, to encourage their testing, inspection
and certification bodies to join any operative international agreements or
arrangements for harmonisation or facilitation of acceptance of
conformity assessment results;

(g) ensure that economic operators have a choice amongst conformity
assessment facilities designated by the authorities to perform the tasks
required by domestic law to assure compliance;

(h) endeavour to use accreditation to qualify conformity assessment bodies;
and

(1) ensure independence of, and absence of conflict of interest between,
accreditation bodies and conformity assessment bodies.

5. Upon request from a Party, the other Party may decide to enter into
consultations with a view to defining sectoral initiatives regarding the use of
conformity assessment procedures or the facilitation of acceptance of
conformity assessment results that are appropriate for the respective sectors.
The Party making the request should provide relevant information on how the
sectoral initiative would facilitate trade. If the other Party declines that request
it shall, upon request, provide its reasons.

6. The Parties affirm their obligations under Article 5.2.5 of the TBT
Agreement that fees imposed for mandatory conformity assessment of
imported products shall be equitable in relation to any fees chargeable for
assessing the conformity of like products of domestic origin or originating in
any other country, taking into account communication, transportation and
other costs arising from differences between location of facilities of the
applicant and the conformity assessment body.

EU/VN/en 48

ARTICLE 5.7

Transparency

The Parties acknowledge the importance of transparency with regard to the

preparation, adoption and application of standards, technical regulations and
conformity assessment procedures. In that regard, the Parties affirm their
transparency obligations under the TBT Agreement. Each Party shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

take the other Party's comments into account where a part of the process
of developing a technical regulation is open to public consultation, and
provide, upon request, written responses in a timely manner to the
comments made by the other Party;

ensure that economic operators and other interested persons of the other
Party are allowed to participate in any formal public consultation process
concerning the development of technical regulations, on terms no less
favourable than those accorded to its own legal or natural persons;

further to subparagraph l(a) of Article 5.4 (Technical Regulations), in
cases where impact assessments are carried out, inform the other Party,
upon request, of the outcome of the impact assessment of the proposed
technical regulation;

when making notifications in accordance with Article 2.9.2 or 5.6.2 of
the TBT Agreement:

(i) allow at least a period of 60 days, following the notification, for the
other Party to provide comments in writing to the proposal and,
where practicable, give due consideration to reasonable requests for
extending that period;

(ii) provide the electronic version of the notified text;

(111) provide, in case the notified text is not in one of the official WTO
languages, a detailed and comprehensive description of the content
of the measure in the WTO notification format;

(iv) reply in writing to written comments received from the other Party
on the proposal, no later than the date of publication of the final
technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure; and

EU/VN/en 49

(v) provide information on the adoption and the entry into force of the
notified measure and the adopted final text through an addendum to
the original notification;

(e) allow sufficient time between the publication of technical regulations and
their entry into force for economic operators of the other Party to adapt,
except where urgent problems of safety, health, environmental protection
or national security arise or threaten to arise;

(f) ensure that all technical regulations and mandatory conformity
assessment procedures adopted and in force are publicly available on
official websites and free of charge; and

(g) ensure that the enquiry point, established in accordance with Article 10.1
of the TBT Agreement, provides information and answers in one of the
official WTO languages to reasonable enquiries from the other Party or
from interested persons of the other Party on adopted technical
regulations, conformity assessment procedures and standards.

ARTICLE 5.8
Market Surveillance
The Parties shall:
(a) exchange views on market surveillance and enforcement activities;

(b) ensure that market surveillance functions are carried out by the
competent authorities and that no conflicts of interest exist between the
market surveillance function and the conformity assessment function; and

(c) ensure that there are no conflicts of interest between market surveillance
bodies and the economic operators subject to control or supervision.

EU/VN/en 50

ARTICLE 5.9
Marking and Labelling

1. The Parties note that a technical regulation may include or deal
exclusively with marking or labelling requirements. When a Party's technical
regulations contain mandatory marking or labelling requirements, that Party
shall observe the principles of Article 2.2 of the TBT Agreement, in particular,
that technical regulations shall not be prepared with a view to, or with the
effect of, creating unnecessary obstacles to international trade, and that they
shall not be more trade restrictive than necessary to fulfil a legitimate
objective.

2. When requiring mandatory marking or labelling of products, a Party
shall:

(a) only require information which is relevant for consumers or users of the
product or which indicates the product's conformity with the mandatory
technical requirements;

(b) not require any prior approval, registration or certification of the labels or
markings of products as a precondition for placing on its market products
that otherwise comply with its mandatory technical requirements, unless
it is necessary in view of the risk of the products to human, animal or
plant health or life, the environment or national security; this
subparagraph is without prejudice to the right of the Party to require prior
approval of the specific information to be provided on the label or
marking in light of the relevant domestic regulations;

(c) in the event that it requires the use of a unique identification number by
economic operators, issue that number to the economic operators of the
other Party without undue delay and on a non-discriminatory basis;

(d) provided it is not misleading, contradictory or confusing in relation to the
information required in the Party importing the goods, permit the
following:

(1) information in other languages in addition to the language required
in the Party importing the goods;

(11) internationally accepted nomenclatures, pictograms, symbols or

EU/VN/en 51

graphics; or

(411) information in addition to that required in the Party importing the
goods;

(e) accept that labelling, including supplementary labelling or corrections to
labelling, take place, where relevant, in authorised premises, such as in
customs or bonded licensed warehouses at the point of import, in the
importing Party prior to the distribution and sale of the product; the Party
may require that the original labelling is not removed;

(f) when it considers that the legitimate objectives under the TBT
Agreement are not compromised, endeavour to accept non-permanent or
detachable labels, or marking or labelling in the accompanying
documentation rather than physically attached to the product.

ARTICLE 5.10
Cooperation and Trade Facilitation

1. The Parties shall strengthen their cooperation in the field of standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures with a view to
increasing the mutual understanding of their respective systems and to
facilitating trade between them. To that end, they may establish regulatory
dialogues at both horizontal and sectoral levels.

2. The Parties shall aim to identify, develop and promote bilateral initiatives
regarding standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures that are appropriate for particular issues or sectors and which
facilitate trade. Those initiatives may include:

(a) promoting good regulatory practices through regulatory cooperation,
including the exchange of information, experiences and data, with a view
to improving the quality and effectiveness of their standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures and making efficient
use of regulatory resources;

(b) using a risk-based approach to conformity assessment such as relying on
a supplier's declaration of conformity for low-risk products and, where

EU/VN/en 52

appropriate, reducing the complexity of technical regulations, standards
and conformity assessment procedures;

(c) increasing the convergence of their standards, technical regulations and
conformity assessment procedures with relevant international standards,
guides or recommendations;

(d) avoiding unnecessary divergence of approach in standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures where no international
standards, guides or recommendations exist;

(e) promoting or enhancing cooperation between the Parties' respective
organisations, public or private, responsible for standardisation,
conformity assessment and metrology;

(f) ensuring efficient interaction and cooperation between regulatory
authorities at regional or international level; and

(g) exchanging information, to the extent possible, about agreements and
arrangements related to technical barriers to trade subscribed to at
international level.

3. Upon request, a Party shall give due consideration to proposals for
cooperation from the other Party under this Chapter. This cooperation shall be
undertaken, inter alia, through dialogue in appropriate fora, joint projects,
technical assistance and capacity-building programmes on standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures in selected industrial areas,
as mutually agreed.

ARTICLE 5.11
Consultations

1. A Party shall give prompt and favourable consideration to any request for
consultations from the other Party on issues relating to the implementation of
this Chapter.

2. In order to clarify or resolve issues referred to in paragraph 1, the Trade
Committee may establish a working group with a view to identifying a

EU/VN/en 53

workable and practical solution to facilitate trade. The working group shall
comprise representatives of the Parties.

ARTICLE 5.12
Implementation

1. Each Party shall designate a contact point in the Ministry of Science and
Technology of Viet Nam and in the European Commission, respectively, and
provide the other Party with the contact details of the office or official
responsible for matters covered under this Chapter, including information on
telephone, facsimile, e-mail and other relevant details.

2. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party of any change of its
contact point and amendments to the information referred to in paragraph 1.

3. The contact points shall, inter alia:
(a) monitor the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) facilitate cooperation activities, as appropriate, in accordance with Article
5.10 (Cooperation and Trade Facilitation);

(c) promptly address any issue that a Party raises in relation to the
development, adoption, application or enforcement of standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

(d) consult, upon a Party's request, on matters arising under this Chapter;

(e) take any other actions which may assist the Parties in implementing this
Chapter; and

(f) carry out other functions as may be delegated by the Committee on Trade
in Goods.

4. The enquiry points, established in accordance with Article 10.1 of the
TBT Agreement, shall:

(a) facilitate the exchange of information between the Parties on standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, 1n response

EU/VN/en 54

to all reasonable requests for such information from the other Party; and

(b) refer enquiries from the other Party to the appropriate regulatory
authorities.

CHAPTER 6

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

ARTICLE 6.1
Scope

1. This Chapter applies to the preparation, adoption and application of all
sanitary and phytosanitary (hereinafter referred to as "SPS") measures of a
Party which may, directly or indirectly affect trade between the Parties.

2. This Chapter does not affect the rights of the Parties under Chapter 5
(Technical Barriers to Trade) with respect to measures not within the scope of
this Chapter.

ARTICLE 6.2
Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) enhance the effective implementation of the principles and disciplines of
the SPS Agreement and international standards, guidelines and
recommendations developed by relevant international organisations;

(b) protect human, animal or plant life or health in the territory of each Party
while facilitating trade between the Parties and to ensure that SPS
measures adopted by each Party do not create unnecessary obstacles to
trade;

(c) strengthen communication and cooperation on, and resolution of, SPS

EU/VN/en 55

(d)

(a)
(b)

(c)

2.

matters that affect trade between the Parties and other agreed matters of
mutual interest; and

promote greater transparency and understanding in the application of
each Party's SPS measures.

ARTICLE 6.3
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
the definitions contained in Annex A of the SPS Agreement apply;

"competent authorities" means each Party's authorities responsible for
developing, implementing and administering SPS measures within its
territory; and

"SPS Committee" means the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures referred to in Article 6.11 (Committee on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures) established pursuant to Article 17.2 (Specialised
Committees).

The Parties may agree on other definitions for the application of this

Chapter taking into consideration the glossaries and definitions of the relevant
international organisations, such as the Codex Alimentarius Commission
(hereinafter referred to as "Codex Alimentarius"), the World Organisation for
Animal Health (hereinafter referred to as "OJE"), and the International Plant
Protection Convention (hereinafter referred to as "IPPC").

I.

ARTICLE 6.4
General Provisions

The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to

each other under the SPS Agreement.

2.

Each Party shall apply the SPS Agreement in the development,

EU/VN/en 56

application or recognition of any SPS measure with the aim of facilitating
trade between the Parties while protecting human, animal or plant life or
health in its territory.

ARTICLE 6.5

Competent Authorities and Contact Points

1. To ensure close and effective working relationships between the Parties
in achieving the objectives of this Chapter, the competent authorities are the
following:

(a) in the case of Viet Nam, responsibility for SPS matters is shared between
governmental agencies as follows:

(i)

(il)

the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, or its successor,
is responsible for animal and plant health; it administers surveillance
and control measures to prevent the introduction of diseases which
negatively affect human and animal health; it also administers a
comprehensive program to control and prevent the incursion of
diseases and pests which negatively affect plant health and the
economy; and, for animal and plant products destined for
exportation, it is also responsible for inspection, for quarantine and
for the issuance of certifications attesting to the agreed standards
and requirements of the Union; and

the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development and the Ministry of Industry and Trade, or their
respective successors, are, in accordance with their respective
competences, responsible for the safety of food destined for human
consumption; for the importation of food, they administer
surveillance and control measures, including the development of
national technical regulations and approval procedures, the conduct
of risk assessment of products and inspections of establishments, to
ensure the compliance with the agreed standards and requirements
of Viet Nam; for the exportation of food, they are also responsible
for inspection and for the issuance of health certifications;

EU/VN/en 57

(b)

2.

in the case of the Union, responsibility is shared between the
administrations of the Member States and the European Commission as
follows:

(i) as regards exports to Viet Nam, the Member States are responsible
for the control of the production conditions and requirements,
including statutory inspections and issuing health and animal
welfare certifications attesting to compliance with Viet Nam's
standards and requirements;

(ii) as regards imports from Viet Nam, the Member States are
responsible for controlling compliance of imports with the Union's
import conditions;

(ii1) the European Commission is responsible for overall coordination,
inspection and audits of inspection systems and the necessary
legislative action to ensure uniform application of standards and
requirements within the Union's internal market.

As of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the competent

authorities of each Party shall provide each other with a contact point for
communication on all matters arising under this Chapter. The contact points'
functions shall include:

(a)

(b)

3.

enhancing communication among the Parties' agencies and ministries
responsible for SPS matters; and

facilitating information exchange in order to enhance mutual
understanding of each Party's SPS measures, the regulatory processes that
relate to those measures and their impact on trade in the products
concerned between the Parties.

The Parties shall ensure that the information provided under paragraphs 1

and 2 is kept up to date.

I.

ARTICLE 6.6
Import Requirements and Procedures

The general import requirements of a Party shall be applicable to the

entire territory of the exporting Party, without prejudice to the ability of the

EU/VN/en 58

importing Party to take decisions and measures in accordance with the criteria
set out in Article 6.9 (Measures Linked to Animal and Plant Health).

2. Each Party shall adopt only measures that are scientifically justified,
consistent with the risk involved and that represent the least restrictive
measures available and result in minimum impediment to trade.

3. The importing Party shall ensure that its import requirements and
procedures are applied in a proportional and non-discriminatory manner.

4. The import procedures shall aim at minimising negative trade effects and
expedite the clearance process while complying with the importing Party's
requirements and procedures.

5. The importing Party shall ensure full transparency of its import
requirements and procedures.

6. The exporting Party shall ensure compliance with the import
requirements of the importing Party.

7. Each Party shall establish and update lists of regulated pests, using
scientific terminology, and make such lists available to the other Party.

8. Phytosanitary import requirements shall be restricted to measures
ensuring the respect for the appropriate level of protection of the importing
Party, and limited to the regulated pests of concern to the importing Party.
Without prejudice to Article 6 of the IPPC, a Party shall not impose or
maintain phytosanitary measures for non-regulated pests.

9. A pest risk analysis undertaken by a Party shall be carried out without
undue delay after the initial request of the exporting Party. In case of
difficulties, the Parties shall agree within the SPS Committee on a time
schedule for carrying out the pest risk analysis.

10. The importing Party shall have the right to carry out import checks based
on the SPS risks associated with imports. Those checks shall be carried out
without undue delay and with a minimum impediment to trade. If products do
not conform to the requirements of the importing Party, any action taken by
the importing Party shall be in conformity with the international standards and
proportionate to the risk caused by the product.

EU/VN/en 59

11. The importing Party shall make available the information about the
frequency of import checks carried out on products. This frequency may be
adapted as a consequence of verifications or import checks, or by mutual
agreement between the Parties.

12. Any fees imposed for the procedures related to the import of products
under this Chapter shall be equitable in relation to any fees charged on like
domestic products and shall not be higher than the actual cost of the service.

ARTICLE 6.7
Verifications

1. In order to obtain or maintain confidence in the effective implementation
of this Chapter, the importing Party has the right to carry out verifications,
including:

(a) by conducting verification visits to the exporting Party to verify all or
part of the exporting Party's control system, in accordance with the
relevant international standards, guidelines and recommendations of the
Codex Alimentarius, OIE and IPPC; the expenses of such verification
visits shall be borne by the Party carrying out the verification visit; and

(b) by information requests to the exporting Party about its control system
and the results of the controls carried out under that system.

2. Each Party shall provide the other Party with the results and conclusions
of the verification visits carried out in the territory of the other Party.

3. If the importing Party decides to carry out a verification visit to the
exporting Party, it shall notify the exporting Party of this visit at least 60
working days before such verification visit is carried out, unless agreed
otherwise. Any modification to this verification visit shall be mutually agreed
by the Parties.

4. The importing Party shall provide a draft verification report to the
exporting Party within 45 working days of the completion of the verifications.
The exporting Party shall have 30 working days to comment on the draft
report. Comments made by the exporting Party shall be attached to and, where

EU/VN/en 60

appropriate, included in the final verification report which shall be delivered
within 30 working days. If, during the verification, the importing Party
identifies a significant human, animal or plant health risk, it shall inform the
exporting Party as quickly as possible and in any case within 10 working days
following the end of the verification.

ARTICLE 6.8
Procedure for Listing of Establishments

1. Upon request of the importing Party, the exporting Party shall inform the
importing Party of its list of establishments which comply with the importing
Party's requirements for approval and for which satisfactory sanitary
guarantees have been provided in accordance with Annex 6 (Requirements
and Procedures for Approval of Establishments for Products).

2. Upon request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall approve
within 45 working days the list of establishments referred to in paragraph 1,
without prior inspection of individual establishments.

3. If the importing Party requests additional information, the time period
referred to in paragraph 2 shall be extended by up to 30 working days.
Following the approval of the list of establishment, the importing Party shall
take necessary measures, in accordance with its applicable legal procedures, to
allow the importation of products concerned.

4. If the importing Party rejects the request for approval, it should inform
without delay the exporting Party of the reasons upon which that rejection was
based.

ARTICLE 6.9
Measures Linked to Animal and Plant Health

1. The Parties recognise the concepts of disease-free areas, areas of low
disease prevalence, and compartmentalisation in accordance with the SPS
Agreement and OIE standards, guidelines or recommendations. The Parties

EU/VN/en 61

also recognise the animal health status as determined by the OIE.

2. The Parties recognise the concepts of pest-free areas, areas of low pest
prevalence, protected zones and pest free production sites in accordance with
the SPS Agreement and IPPC standards, guidelines or recommendations.

3. The Parties shall consider factors such as geographical location,
ecosystems, epidemiological surveillance, and the effectiveness of the SPS
controls.

4. The SPS Committee shall define in further detail the procedure for the
recognition of the concepts referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 taking into
account the SPS Agreement and the OIE and IPPC standards, guidelines or
recommendations.

5. When the importing Party assesses the self-determination of the animal
or plant health status made by the exporting Party, it shall, in principle, base
its own assessment of the animal or plant health status of the exporting Party
or parts thereof on the information provided by the exporting Party in
accordance with the SPS Agreement and the OJE and IPPC standards,
guidelines or recommendations. The importing Party shall endeavour to
provide the exporting Party its decision without undue delay after the request
for assessment.

6. If the importing Party does not accept the self-determination of the
animal or plant health status made by the exporting Party, it shall explain the
reasons and, upon request by the exporting Party, enter into consultations as
soon as possible to reach an alternative solution.

7. The exporting Party shall provide relevant evidence in order to
objectively demonstrate to the importing Party that the animal or plant health
status of those areas is likely to remain unchanged. For that purpose, the
exporting Party shall, upon request by the importing Party, give the importing
Party reasonable access for inspection, testing and other relevant procedures.

EU/VN/en 62

ARTICLE 6.10
Equivalence

1. The Parties recognise that the application of equivalence in Article 4 of
the SPS Agreement is an important tool for trade facilitation and has mutual
benefits for both exporting and importing countries.

2. Equivalence can be accepted for a specific SPS measure or SPS measures
related to a certain product or categories of products, or on a systems-wide
basis.

3. The importing Party shall accept the SPS measures and systems of the
exporting Party as equivalent if the exporting Party objectively demonstrates
that its measures achieve the importing Party's appropriate level of SPS
protection. To facilitate a determination of equivalence, the importing Party
shall, upon request, explain the objective of any relevant SPS measures to the
other Party.

4. Within three months of the date of receipt by the importing Party of a
request from the exporting Party, the Parties shall hold consultations in order
to determine the equivalence of SPS measures and systems.

5. The importing Party shall make a determination of equivalence without
undue delay after the exporting Party has demonstrated the equivalence of the
proposed SPS measures and systems.

6. The importing Party shall accelerate the determination of equivalence in
particular in respect of those products which it has historically imported from
the exporting Party.

7. In case of multiple requests from the exporting Party, the Parties shall
agree within the SPS Committee on a time schedule in accordance with which
they shall initiate the process.

8. In accordance with Article 9 of the SPS Agreement, the importing Party
shall give full consideration to the requests by the exporting Party for
technical assistance to facilitate the implementation of this Article. This
assistance may, inter alia, help to identify and implement measures which can
be recognised as equivalent or to otherwise enhance market access.

EU/VN/en 63

9. The consideration by the importing Party of a request from the exporting
Party for recognition of equivalence of its SPS measures with regard to a
specific product shall not be in itself a reason to disrupt or suspend ongoing
imports from that Party of that product. When the importing Party has made
an equivalence determination, the Parties shall formally record it and apply it
without delay to trade between them in the relevant area.

ARTICLE 6.11
Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The SPS Committee established pursuant to Article 17.2 (Specialised
Committees) shall include representatives of the competent authorities of the
Parties. All decisions made by the SPS Committee shall be by mutual
agreement.

2. The SPS Committee shall meet in person within one year of the entry
into force of this Agreement. It shall meet at least annually thereafter or as
mutually determined by the Parties. It shall establish its rules of procedure at
its first meeting. It shall meet in person, via teleconference, video-conference,
or through other means as mutually agreed by the Parties.

3. The SPS Committee may propose to the Trade Committee to establish
working groups which shall identify and address technical and scientific issues
arising from this Chapter and explore opportunities for further collaboration
on SPS matters of mutual interest.

4. The SPS Committee may address any matter related to the effective
functioning of this Chapter, including facilitating communication and
strengthening cooperation between the Parties. In particular it shall have the
following responsibilities and functions:

(a) developing the necessary procedures or arrangements for the
implementation of this Chapter;

(b) monitoring the progress in the implementation of this Chapter;

(c) providing a forum for discussion of problems arising from the application
of certain SPS measures with a view to reaching mutually acceptable

EU/VN/en 64

(d)

(e)

(f)
5.

solutions and promptly addressing any matters that could create
unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties;

providing a forum to exchange information, expertise and experiences in
the field of SPS matters;

identifying, initiating and reviewing technical assistance projects and
activities between the Parties; and

carrying out any other function as mutually agreed between the Parties.

The Parties may, by decision in the SPS Committee, adopt

recommendations and decisions related to the authorisation of imports,
exchange of information, transparency, recognition of regionalisation,
equivalence and alternative measures, and any other matter referred to under
this Article.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

ARTICLE 6.12
Transparency and Exchange of Information
The Parties shall:

ensure transparency as regards SPS measures applicable to trade between
them;

enhance mutual understanding of each Party's SPS measures and their
application;

exchange information on matters related to the development and
application of SPS measures, including the progress on new available
scientific evidence, that affect, or may affect, trade between them with a
view to minimising their negative trade effects;

upon request of a Party, communicate the import requirements that apply
to the import of a particular product within 15 working days of the date
of receipt of the request; and

upon request of a Party, communicate progress achieved in processing
the application for the authorisation of a particular product within 15

EU/VN/en 65

working days of the date of receipt of the request.

2. When a Party has made the information available either by notification to
the WTO in accordance with the relevant rules and procedures, or by
publication on its official publicly and free of charge accessible websites, the
exchange of information pursuant to subparagraphs 1(c) to 1(e) shall not be
required.

3. All notifications under this Chapter shall be made to the contact points
referred to under Article 6.5 (Competent Authorities and Contact Points).

ARTICLE 6.13
Consultations

1. When a Party considers that an SPS measure affecting bilateral trade
warrants further discussion, it may, through the contact points referred to
under Article 6.5 (Competent Authorities and Contact Points), request full
explanation and, if necessary, request consultations on that SPS measure. The
other Party shall respond promptly to such requests.

2. The Parties shall make every effort to reach, within an agreed timeframe,
a mutually acceptable solution through consultations. Should the consultations
fail to resolve the matter, it shall be considered by the SPS Committee.

ARTICLE 6.14
Emergency Measures

1. Each Party shall notify the other Party in writing within two working
days of the detection of any serious or significant risk to human, animal or
plant life or health, including any food emergencies, affecting products for
which trade between the Parties takes place.

2. Where a Party has serious concerns regarding a risk to human, animal or
plant life or health affecting products for which trade between the Parties takes
place, it may request consultations in accordance with Article 6.13
(Consultations). The consultations shall take place as soon as possible. Each

EU/VN/en 66

Party shall endeavour to provide in due time all necessary information to
avoid disruption in trade.

3. The importing Party may take, without previous notification, measures
necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health. For consignments in
transport between the Parties, the importing Party shall consider the most
suitable and proportional solution in order to avoid unnecessary disruptions to
trade.

4. The Party taking the measures shall inform the other Party as soon as
possible and in any case no later than 24 hours after the adoption of the
measure. Either Party may request any information related to the SPS situation
and any measures adopted. The other Party shall reply as soon as the requested
information is available.

5. Upon request of either Party and in accordance with Article 6.13
(Consultations) the Parties shall hold consultations regarding the situation
within 10 working days of the notification referred to in paragraph 1. The
consultations shall be held with a view to avoiding unnecessary disruptions to
trade. The Parties may consider options for the facilitation of the
implementation or the replacement of the SPS measures.

ARTICLE 6.15
Technical Assistance and Special and Differential Treatment

1. The Union should provide technical assistance to address specific needs
of Viet Nam to comply with the Union's SPS measures, including food safety,
animal and plant health, and the use of international standards.

2. In accordance with Article 10 of the SPS Agreement, in the case of new
SPS measures, the Union shall take into account the special needs of Viet
Nam so as to maintain the export opportunities of Viet Nam while continuing
to achieve the Union's level of protection. The SPS Committee shall be
consulted upon request by either Party to reflect on and decide about:

(a) longer timeframes for compliance;

(b) alternative import conditions in the context of equivalence; and

EU/VN/en 67

(c) technical assistance activities.

CHAPTER 7

NON-TARIFF BARRIERS TO TRADE
AND INVESTMENT IN RENEWABLE ENERGY GENERATION

ARTICLE 7.1
Objectives

In line with global efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the Parties
share the objectives of promoting, developing and increasing the generation of
energy from renewable and sustainable sources, particularly through
facilitating trade and investment. To this effect, the Parties shall cooperate
towards removing or reducing non-tariff barriers and fostering cooperation,
taking into account, where appropriate, regional and international standards.

ARTICLE 7.2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) "local content requirement" means:

(i) with respect to goods, a requirement for an enterprise to purchase or
use goods of domestic origin or from a domestic source, whether
specified in terms of particular products, in terms of volume or
value of products, or in terms of a proportion of volume or value of
its local production;

(11) with respect to services, a requirement which restricts the choice of
the service supplier or the service supplied to the detriment of
services or service suppliers from the other Party;

(b) "measures requiring to form a partnership with local companies" means

EU/VN/en 68

any requirements to jointly establish or operate with local companies a
legal person, a partnership according to domestic law, or a joint venture,
or to enter into contractual relations such as business cooperation
contracts with local companies;

(c) "offset" means any undertaking that imposes the use of a local content
requirement, local suppliers, technology transfer, investment, counter-
trade or similar actions to encourage local development;

(d) "renewable and sustainable sources" means sources in the form of wind,
solar, geothermal or hydrothermal power, ocean energy, hydropower
with capacity of 50 megawatt or less, biomass, landfill gas, sewage
treatment plant gas or biogases; it does not encompass products from
which energy is generated; and

(e) "service supplier" means any natural or legal person of a Party that
supplies a service.

ARTICLE 7.3
Scope

1. This Chapter applies to measures which affect trade and investment
between the Parties related to the generation of energy from renewable and
sustainable sources.

2. This Chapter does not apply to research and development projects and to
demonstration projects carried out on a non-commercial scale.

3. This Chapter does not apply to projects funded and governed by
agreements with international organisations or foreign governments to which
the procedures or conditions of those donors apply.

4. Subject to paragraph 5, this Chapter is without prejudice to the
application of any other relevant provisions of this Agreement, including any
exceptions, reservations or restrictions to those provisions, to the measures
mentioned in paragraph 1, mutatis mutandis. For greater certainty, in the event
of an inconsistency between this Chapter and other provisions of this
Agreement, those provisions shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

EU/VN/en 69

5.

Subparagraphs (a) and (b) of Article 7.4 (Principles) apply as from five

years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 7.4
Principles
A Party shall:
(a) refrain from adopting measures providing for local content requirements

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

or any other offset affecting the other Party's products, service suppliers,
investors or enterprises;

refrain from adopting measures requiring to form a partnership with local
companies, unless those partnerships are deemed necessary for technical
reasons and that Party can demonstrate those reasons upon request of the
other Party;

ensure that any measures concerning the authorisation, certification and
licensing procedures that are applied, in particular, to equipment, plants
and associated transmission network infrastructures, are objective,
transparent, non-arbitrary and do not discriminate amongst applicants
from the Parties;

ensure that administrative fees and charges imposed on or in connection
with the:

(i) importation and use of products originating in the other Party, by the
other Party's suppliers, are subject to Articles 2.18 (Administrative
Fees, Other Charges and Formalities on Imports and Exports) and
4.10 (Fees and Charges); and

(11) provision of services by the other Party's suppliers are subject to
Articles 8.18 (Scope and Definitions), 8.19 (Conditions for
Licensing and Qualification) and 8.20 (Licensing and Qualification
Procedures); and

ensure that the terms, conditions and procedures for the connection and
access to electricity transmission grids are transparent and do not

EU/VN/en 70

discriminate against suppliers of the other Party.

ARTICLE 7.5
Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment

1. This Article applies to the products covered by the tariff headings listed
in Annex 7 (List of Tariff Headings). The Parties may agree to include other
products in this list by exchange of letters.

2. If relevant international standards established by the International
Organisation for Standardisation or the International Electrotechnical
Commission exist, the Parties shall use those international standards, or their
relevant parts, as a basis for any standard, technical regulation or conformity
assessment procedure, except when those international standards or relevant
parts would be an ineffective or inappropriate means for the fulfilment of the
legitimate objectives pursued. In those cases, a Party shall, upon request of the
other Party, identify the part of the respective standard, technical regulation or
conformity assessment procedure which substantially deviates from the
relevant international standard and provide justification as to the reasons for
the deviation.

3. If appropriate, the Parties shall specify technical regulations based on
product requirements in terms of performance, including safety and
environmental performance, rather than design or descriptive characteristics.

4. A Party accepting a supplier's declaration of conformity as a positive
assurance of conformity shall endeavour not to require the submission of test
results.

5. If a Party requires test reports, whether alone, as the basis of, or in
conjunction with other assurances of conformity, or as positive assurance that
a product is in conformity with its relevant standards or technical regulations,
it shall endeavour to accept test reports in form of the International
Electrotechnical Commission System of Conformity Assessment Schemes for
Electrotechnical Equipment and Components (IECEE CB Scheme) Test
Reports without requiring any further testing.

6. If a Party requires third party's certification for product, it shall

EU/VN/en 71

endeavour to accept a valid CB Test Certificate under the IECEE CB Scheme
as sufficient assurance of conformity without requiring any further conformity
assessment or administrative procedures or approvals.

7. This Article is without prejudice to the Parties applying requirements not
related to the products in question, such as zoning laws or building codes.

ARTICLE 7.6
Exceptions

1. This Chapter is subject to Articles 2.22 (General Exceptions), 8.53
(General Exceptions) and 9.3 (Security and General Exceptions).

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing a Party from
adopting or enforcing measures necessary for the safe operation of the energy
networks concerned, or the safety of the energy supply, subject to the
requirement that those measures are not applied in a manner which would
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the
Parties' products, service suppliers or investors under like circumstances, or a
disguised restriction on trade and investment between the Parties.

ARTICLE 7.7
Implementation and Cooperation

1. The Parties shall cooperate and exchange information on any issues
relating to the implementation of this Chapter in the relevant specialised
committees established pursuant to Article 17.2 (Specialised Committees).
The Trade Committee may decide to adopt appropriate implementing
measures to this effect.

2. The Parties shall exchange information, regulatory experiences and best
practices in areas such as:

(a) the design and non-discriminatory implementation of measures
promoting the use of energy from renewable sources;

EU/VN/en 72

(b) technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures,
such as those relating to grid code requirements.

3. The Parties shall promote cooperation, with respect to domestic or
regional technical regulations, regulatory concepts, standards, requirements
and conformity assessment procedures which comply with international
standards, in relevant regional fora.

CHAPTER 8

LIBERALISATION OF INVESTMENT,
TRADE IN SERVICES AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE

SECTION A

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 8.1
Objectives and Scope

1. The Parties, affirming their respective commitments under the WTO
Agreement and their commitment to create a better climate for the
development of trade and investment between the Parties, hereby lay down the
necessary arrangements for the progressive liberalisation of investment and
trade in services and for cooperation on electronic commerce.

2. Consistent with the provisions of this Chapter, each Party retains the right
to adopt, maintain and enforce measures necessary to pursue legitimate policy
objectives such as the protection of the environment and public health, social
policy, the integrity and stability of the financial system, the promotion of
security and safety, and the promotion and protection of cultural diversity.

3. This Chapter does not apply to measures affecting natural persons
seeking access to the employment market of a Party, nor does it apply to
measures regarding citizenship, residence or employment on a permanent

EU/VN/en 73

basis.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from applying measures to
regulate the entry of natural persons into, or their temporary stay in, its
territory, including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of, and to
ensure the orderly movement of natural persons across, its borders, provided
that such measures are not applied in such a manner as to nullify or impair the
benefits! accruing to any Party under the terms of a specific commitment in
this Chapter and its Annexes.

5. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting the obligations of
the Parties under Chapter 9 (Government Procurement) or to impose any
additional obligation relating to government procurement.

6. This Chapter does not apply to subsidies granted by the Parties, except
for Article 8.8 (Performance Requirements).

7. A Party's decision not to issue, renew or maintain a subsidy or grant shall
not constitute a breach of Article 8.8 (Performance Requirements) in the
following circumstances:

(a) in the absence of any of the Party's specific commitments to the investor
under law or contract to issue, renew, or maintain that subsidy or grant;
or

(b) in accordance with any terms or conditions attached to the issuance,
renewal or maintenance of the subsidy or grant.

8. This Chapter does not apply to the Parties' respective social security
systems or to activities in the territory of each Party, which are connected,
even occasionally, with the exercise of official authority.

The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons of certain countries and not for those of
others shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing benefits under a specific commitment.
In the case of the Union, "subsidy" includes "state aid" as defined in Union law. For
Viet Nam, "subsidy" includes investment incentives, and investment assistance such as
production site assistance, human resources training and competitiveness strengthening
activities, such as assistance for technology, research and development, legal aids, market
information and promotion.

EU/VN/en 74

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

ARTICLE 8.2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

"aircraft repair and maintenance services during which an aircraft 1s
withdrawn from service" means such activities when undertaken on an
aircraft or a part thereof while it is withdrawn from service and do not
include so-called line maintenance;

"computer reservation system (CRS) services" means services provided
by computerised systems that contain information about air carriers'
schedules, availability, fares and fare rules, through which reservations
can be made or tickets may be issued;

"cross-border supply of services" means the supply of a service:
(i) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party; or
(ii) in the territory of a Party to the service consumer of the other Party;

"economic activities" includes activities of an industrial, commercial and
professional character and activities of craftsmen, but does not include
activities performed in the exercise of governmental authority;

"enterprise" means a juridical person, branch! or representative office set
up through establishment;

"establishment" means the setting up, including the acquisition, of a
juridical person or creation of a branch or a representative office in the
Union or in Viet Nam, respectively, with a view to establishing or
maintaining lasting economic links;

"ground handling services" means the supply at an airport of the
following services: airline representation, administration and supervision;
passenger handling; baggage handling; ramp services; catering; air cargo
and mail handling; fuelling of an aircraft, aircraft servicing and cleaning;

For greater certainty, a branch of a legal entity of a third country shall not be considered as an
enterprise of a Party.

For greater certainty, this does not include the operation of an enterprise as defined in
subparagraph (m).

EU/VN/en 75

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(1)

surface transport; flight operation, crew administration and flight
planning; ground handling services does not include security, aircraft
repair and maintenance, or management or operation of essential
centralised airport infrastructure such as de-icing facilities, fuel
distribution systems, baggage handling systems, and fixed intra-airport
transport systems;

"investor" means a natural person or a juridical person of a Party that
seeks to establish, is establishing or has established an enterprise in the
territory of the other Party;

"juridical person" means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise
organised under applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and
whether privately-owned or governmentally-owned, including any
corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship or
association;

"juridical person of a Party" means a juridical person of the Union or a
juridical person of Viet Nam, set up in accordance with the domestic
laws and regulations of the Union or its Member States, or of Viet Nam,
respectively, and engaged in substantive business operations in the
territory of the Union or of Viet Nam, respectively;

"measures adopted or maintained by a Party" means measures taken by:
(i) central, regional or local governments and authorities; and

(11) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by
central, regional or local governments or authorities;

"natural person" means a natural person of a Party as defined in

For greater certainty, an investor that "seeks to establish" an enterprise refers to an investor of
a Party that has taken active steps to establish an enterprise in the territory of the other Party,
such as channelling resources or capital in order to set up a business, or applying for a permit
or licence.

In line with its notification of the Treaty establishing the European Community to the WTO
(WT/REG39/1), the Union understands that the concept of "effective and continuous link"
with the economy of a Member State of the Union enshrined in Article 54 of the Treaty on
the Functioning of the European Union is equivalent to the concept of "substantive business
operations". Accordingly, for a juridical person set up in accordance with the laws and
regulations of Viet Nam and having only its registered office or central administration in the
territory of Viet Nam, the Union shall only apply the benefits of this Agreement if that
juridical person possesses an effective and continuous link with the economy of Viet Nam.

EU/VN/en 76

(m)

(n)

(0)

(p)

(q)

(r)

(a)

(b)

subparagraph (h) of Article 1.5;

"operation" means, with respect to an enterprise, the conduct,
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment, sale or other forms of
disposal of the enterprise;!

"selling and marketing of air transport services" means opportunities for
the air carrier concerned to freely sell and market its air transport
services, including all aspects of marketing such as market research,
advertising and distribution; those activities do not include the pricing of
air transport services nor the applicable conditions;

"services" means any service in any sector except services supplied in the
exercise of governmental authority;

"services supplied and activities performed in the exercise of
governmental authority" means services supplied or activities performed
neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or more
economic operators;

"service supplier" of a Party means any natural or juridical person of a
Party that supplies a service; and

"subsidiary" of a juridical person of a Party means a juridical person
which is controlled by another juridical person of that Party in
accordance with its domestic laws and regulations.

A juridical person 1s:

"owned" by natural or juridical persons of one of the Parties if more than
50 per cent of the equity interest in it is beneficially owned by persons of
that Party; or

"controlled" by natural or juridical persons of one of the Parties if such
persons have the power to name a majority of its directors or otherwise to
legally direct its actions.

For greater certainty, this does not include steps taking place at the time of or before the
procedures required for setting up the related enterprise are completed in accordance with the
applicable laws and regulations.

For greater certainty, a subsidiary of a juridical person of a Party may also refer to a juridical
person which is a subsidiary of another subsidiary of a juridical person of that Party.

EU/VN/en 77

3. Notwithstanding the definition of a "juridical person of a Party" in
subparagraph 1(j), shipping companies established outside the Union or Viet
Nam and controlled by nationals of a Member State of the Union or of Viet
Nam, respectively, shall also be covered by this Chapter if their vessels are
registered in accordance with the respective domestic laws and regulations in a
Member State or in Viet Nam and fly the flag of that Member State or of Viet
Nam, respectively.

SECTION B

LIBERALISATION OF INVESTMENT

ARTICLE 8.3
Scope

1. This Section applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party
affecting the establishment or the operation of an enterprise by an investor of
the other Party in the territory of the Party that adopts or maintains those
measures.

2. This Section does not apply to:

(a) audio-visual services;

(b) mining, manufacturing and processing! of nuclear materials;
(c) production of or trade in arms, munitions and war material;

(d) national maritime cabotage;

For greater certainty, processing of nuclear materials includes all the activities contained in
the International Standard Industrial Classification of all Economic Activities as set out in
Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, N 4, ISIC REV 3.1,
2002 code 2330.

Without prejudice to the scope of activities which constitute cabotage under domestic laws
and regulations, national maritime cabotage under this Section covers transportation of
passengers or goods between a port or point located in a Member State of the Union or in
Viet Nam and another port or point located in that same Member State of the Union or in
Viet Nam, including on its continental shelf, as provided for in UNCLOS, and traffic
originating and terminating in the same port or point located in a Member State of the Union

EU/VN/en 78

(e) domestic and international air transport services, whether scheduled or
non-scheduled, and services directly related to the exercise of traffic
rights, other than:

(1) aircraft repair and maintenance services during which an aircraft is
withdrawn from service;

(ii) the selling and marketing of air transport services;
(111) computer reservation system (CRS) services; and
(iv) ground handling services;

and

(f) services supplied and activities performed in the exercise of
governmental authority.

ARTICLE 8.4
Market Access

1. With respect to market access through establishment and maintenance of
an enterprise, each Party shall accord treatment no less favourable than that
provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions agreed and specified
in its respective Schedule of Specific Commitments in Annex 8-A (The
Union's Schedule of Specific Commitments) or 8-B (Viet Nam's Schedule of
Specific Commitments).

2. In sectors where market access commitments are undertaken, the
measures which a Party shall not adopt or maintain either on the basis of a
regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory, unless otherwise
specified in its Schedule of Specific Commitments in Annex 8-A (The Union's
Schedule of Specific Commitments) or 8-B (Viet Nam's Schedule of Specific
Commitments), respectively, are defined as:

(a) limitations on the number of enterprises that may perform a specific
economic activity, whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies,

or in Viet Nam.

EU/VN/en 79

exclusive rights or the requirements of an economic needs test;

(b) limitations on the total value of transactions or assets in the form of
numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(c) limitations on the total number of operations or on the total quantity of
output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of
quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(d) limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual
or aggregate foreign investment;

(e) measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint
ventures through which an investor of the other Party may perform an
economic activity; and

(f) limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed
in a particular sector or that an investor may employ and who are
necessary for, and directly related to, the performance of the economic
activity in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an
economic needs test.

ARTICLE 8.5
National Treatment

1. In the sectors inscribed in its respective Schedule of Specific
Commitments in Annexes 8-A (The Union's Schedule of Specific
Commitments) or 8-B (Viet Nam's Schedule of Specific Commitments) and
subject to any conditions and qualifications set out therein, each Party shall
accord to investors of the other Party and to their enterprises, with respect to
establishment in its territory, treatment no less favourable than that accorded,
in like situations, to its own investors and to their enterprises.

2. A Party shall accord to investors of the other Party and to their
enterprises', with respect to the operation of those enterprises, treatment no

| For the purposes of this paragraph and Article 8.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), "their

enterprises" means enterprises of investors of a Party in existence in the territory of the other

EU/VN/en 80

less favourable than that accorded, in like situations, to its own investors and
to their enterprises.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2 and, in the case of Viet Nam subject to
Annex 8-C (Exemption for Viet Nam on National Treatment), a Party may
adopt or maintain any measure with respect to the operation of an enterprise
provided that such measure is not inconsistent with the commitments set out in
Annex 8-A (The Union's Schedule of Specific Commitments) or 8-B (Viet
Nam's Schedule of Specific Commitments), respectively, where such measure
is:

(a) a measure that is adopted on or before the date of entry into force of this
Agreement;

(b) a measure referred to in subparagraph (a) that is being continued,
replaced or amended after the date of entry into force of this Agreement,
provided the measure is no less consistent with paragraph 2 after it is
continued, replaced or amended than the measure as it existed prior to its
continuation, replacement or amendment; or

(c) a measure not falling within subparagraph (a) or (b), provided it is not
applied in respect of, or in a way that causes loss or damage to,
enterprises established in the territory of the Party before the date of entry
into force of such measure.!

ARTICLE 8.6
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party and to their
enterprises as regards their operation in its territory, treatment no less
favourable than the treatment it accords, in like situations, to investors of a

Party on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or set up or acquired thereafter, that
have been established in accordance with that other Party's applicable laws and regulations.
For the purposes of this subparagraph, the Parties understand that if a Party has provided for a
reasonable phase-in period for the implementation of a measure or if that Party has made any
other attempt to address the effects of the measure on enterprises established before the date
of entry into force of the measure, those factors shall be taken into account in determining
whether the measure causes loss or damage to enterprises made before the date of entry into
force of the measure.

EU/VN/en 81

third country and their enterprises.

2.

(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
3.

Paragraph | does not apply to the following sectors:

communication services, except for postal services and
telecommunication services;

recreational, cultural and sporting services;
fishery and aquaculture;

forestry and hunting; and

mining, including oil and gas.

Paragraph | shall not be construed as obliging a Party to extend to the

investors of the other Party or their enterprises the benefit of any treatment
granted pursuant to any bilateral, regional or multilateral agreement that

entered into force before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

4.

Paragraph | shall not be construed as obliging a Party to extend to the

investors of the other Party or their enterprises the benefit of:

(a)

(b)

(c)

5.

any treatment granted pursuant to any bilateral, regional or multilateral
agreement which includes commitments to abolish substantially all
barriers to the operation of enterprises among the parties or requires the
approximation of legislation of the parties in one or more economic
sectors;!

any treatment resulting from any international agreement for the
avoidance of double taxation or other international agreement or
arrangement relating wholly or mainly to taxation; or

any treatment resulting from measures providing for the recognition of
qualifications, licences or prudential measures in accordance with Article
VII of GATS or its Annex on Financial Services.

For greater certainty, the "treatment" referred to in paragraph 1 does not

include dispute resolution procedures or mechanisms, such as resolution of
investment disputes between investors and states, provided for in any other

1

For greater certainty, the ASEAN Economic Community falls within the concept of a

EU/VN/en 82

bilateral, regional or multilateral agreements. Substantive obligations in such
agreements do not in themselves constitute "treatment" and thus cannot be
taken into account when assessing a breach of this Article. Measures by a
Party pursuant to those substantive obligations shall be considered
"treatment".

6. This Article shall be interpreted in accordance with the principle of
ejusdem generis .|

ARTICLE 8.7
Schedule of Specific Commitments

The sectors liberalised by each Party pursuant to this Section and the terms,
limitations, conditions and qualifications referred to in Articles 8.4 (Market
Access), 8.5 (National Treatment) and 8.8 (Performance Requirements) are set
out in each Party's Schedule of Specific Commitments included in Appendix
8-A-2 to Annex 8-A (The Union's Schedule of Specific Commitments) or in
Appendix 8-B-1 to Annex 8-B (Viet Nam's Schedule of Specific
Commitments), respectively.

ARTICLE 8.8
Performance Requirements

1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments in
Annex 8-A (The Union's Schedule of Specific Commitments) or 8-B (Viet
Nam's Schedule of Specific Commitments), respectively, and subject to any
conditions and qualifications set out therein, a Party shall not impose or
enforce any of the following requirements which are mandatory or enforceable
under domestic law or under administrative rulings, in connection with the
establishment or operation of any enterprise of investors of a Party or of a
third country in its territory:

regional agreement under this subparagraph.

For greater certainty, this paragraph shall not be construed as preventing the interpretation of
other provisions of this Agreement, where appropriate, in accordance with the principle of
ejusdem generis.

EU/VN/en 83

(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

2.

to export a given level or percentage of goods or services;
to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

to purchase, use or accord a preference to goods produced or services
provided in its territory, or to purchase goods or services from natural
persons or enterprises in its territory;

to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or
value of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated
with such enterprise;

to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that such enterprise
produces or provides by relating such sales in any way to the volume or
value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings;

to transfer technology, a production process or other proprietary
knowledge to a natural person or enterprises in its territory; or

to supply exclusively from the territory of the Party a good produced or a
service provided by the enterprise to a specific regional or world market.

In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments in

Annex 8-A (The Union's Schedule of Specific Commitments) or 8-B (Viet
Nam's Schedule of Specific Commitments), respectively, and subject to any
conditions and qualifications set out therein, a Party shall not condition the
receipt or continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with the
establishment or operation of an enterprise of an investor of a Party or of a

third country in its territory, on compliance with any of the following

requirements:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

to purchase, use or accord a preference to goods produced in its territory,
or to purchase goods from producers in its territory;

to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or
value of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated
with such enterprise; or

to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that such enterprise

EU/VN/en 84

produces or provides by relating such sales in any way to the volume or
value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings.

3. Paragraph 2 shall not be construed as preventing a Party from
conditioning the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage in
connection with any enterprise in its territory on compliance with a
requirement to locate production, provide a service, train or employ
workers, construct or expand particular facilities, or carry out research
and development in its territory.

4. Subparagraph 1(f) shall not be construed as preventing the application of
a requirement imposed or a commitment or undertaking enforced by a court,
administrative tribunal or competition authority, in order to remedy an alleged
violation of competition laws.

5. Subparagraphs l(a) to l(c), 2(a) and 2(b) do not apply to qualification
requirements for goods or services with respect to participation in export
promotion and foreign aid programmes.

6. For greater certainty, subparagraphs 2(a) and 2(b) do not apply to
requirements imposed by an importing Party relating to the content of goods
necessary to qualify for preferential tariffs or preferential quotas.

7. For greater certainty, paragraphs | and 2 do not apply to any requirement
other than the requirements set out in those paragraphs.

8. This Article does not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party
in accordance with subparagraph 8(b) of Article II of GATT 1994.

EU/VN/en 85

SECTION C
CROSS-BORDER SUPPLY OF SERVICES
ARTICLE 8.9
Scope

This Section applies to measures of the Parties affecting the cross-border
supply of all services sectors with the exception of:

(a) audio-visual services;
(b) national maritime cabotage;! and

(c) domestic and international air transport services, whether scheduled or
non-scheduled, and services directly related to the exercise of traffic
rights, other than:

(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during which an aircraft is
withdrawn from service;

(ii) the selling and marketing of air transport services;
(411) computer reservation system (CRS) services; and

(iv) ground handling services.

ARTICLE 8.10
Market Access

1. With respect to market access through the cross-border supply of
services, each Party shall accord services and service suppliers of the other
Party treatment not less favourable than that provided for under the terms,

1 Without prejudice to the scope of activities which constitute cabotage under domestic laws
and regulations, national maritime cabotage under this Section covers transportation of
passengers or goods between a port or point located in a Member State of the Union or in
Viet Nam and another port or point located in that same Member State of the Union or in Viet
Nam, including on its continental shelf, as provided for in UNCLOS, and traffic originating
and terminating in the same port or point located in a Member State of the Union or in Viet
Nam.

EU/VN/en 86

limitations and conditions agreed and specified in its respective Schedule of
Specific Commitments in Annex 8-A (The Union's Schedule of Specific
Commitments) or 8-B (Viet Nam's Schedule of Specific Commitments).

2. In sectors where market access commitments are undertaken, the
measures which a Party shall not adopt or maintain either on the basis of a
regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory, unless otherwise
specified in its Schedule of Specific Commitments, are defined as:

(a) limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the form of
numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the
requirement of an economic needs test;

(b) limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the form
of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; and

(c) limitations on the total number of service operations or on the total
quantity of service output expressed in terms of designated numerical
units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test.

ARTICLE 8.11
National Treatment

1. In the sectors inscribed in its respective Schedule of Specific
Commitments in Annex 8-A (The Union's Schedule of Specific
Commitments) or 8-B (Viet Nam's Schedule of Specific Commitments) and
subject to any conditions and qualifications set out therein, each Party shall
accord to services and service suppliers of the other Party, in respect of all
measures affecting the cross-border supply of services, treatment no less
favourable than that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.

2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to
services and service suppliers of the other Party either formally identical
treatment or formally different treatment to that it accords to its own like
services and service suppliers.

3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to
be less favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of

EU/VN/en 87

services or service suppliers of the Party compared to like services or service
suppliers of the other Party.

4. Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed
as requiring any Party to compensate for inherent competitive disadvantages
which result from the foreign character of the relevant services or service
suppliers.

ARTICLE 8.12
Schedule of Specific Commitments

The sectors liberalised by each Party pursuant to this Section and the terms,
limitations, conditions and qualifications referred to in Articles 8.10 (Market
Access) and 8.11 (National Treatment) are set out in each Party's Schedule of
Specific Commitments included in Appendix 8-A-1 to Annex 8-A (The
Union's Schedule of Specific Commitments) or in Appendix 8-B-1 to Annex
8-B (Viet Nam's Schedule of Specific Commitments), respectively.

SECTION D

TEMPORARY PRESENCE OF NATURAL PERSONS
FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES

ARTICLE 8.13
Scope and Definitions

1. This Section applies to measures of a Party concerning the entry and
temporary stay in its territory of business visitors, intra-corporate-transferees,
business sellers, contractual service suppliers and independent professionals.

2. For the purposes of this Section:

(a) "business sellers" means natural persons who are representatives of a
supplier of goods or services of a Party seeking entry and temporary stay

EU/VN/en 88

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

in the territory of the other Party for the purpose of negotiating the sale of
services or goods, or entering into agreements to sell services or goods
for that supplier and who do not engage in supplying the services or the
goods; they do not engage in making direct sales to the general public
and do not receive remuneration from a source located within the host
Party, nor are they commission agents;

"business visitors for establishment purposes" means natural persons
working in a senior position within a juridical person of a Party who are
responsible for setting up an enterprise of such juridical person, provided
they do not offer or provide services or engage in any other economic
activity than required for establishment purposes and they do not receive
remuneration from a source located within the host Party;

"contractual services suppliers" means natural persons employed by a
juridical person of a Party which is not an agency for placement and
supply services of personnel nor acting through such an agency, which
has not been established in the territory of the other Party and which has
concluded a bona fide contract! to supply services with a final consumer
in the other Party, requiring the presence on a temporary basis of its
employees in that Party, in order to fulfil the contract to provide services;

"independent professionals" means natural persons engaged in the supply
of a service and established as self-employed in the territory of a Party
who have not been established in the territory of the other Party and who
have concluded a bona fide contract other than through an agency for
placement and supply services of personnel to supply services with a
final consumer in the other Party, requiring their presence on a temporary
basis in that Party in order to fulfil the contract to provide services;

"intra-corporate transferees" means natural persons who have been
employed by a juridical person or its branch or have been partners in it
for at least one year and who are temporarily transferred to an enterprise
of the juridical person in the territory of the other Party, provided that the
natural person concerned belongs to the categories of managers or

The service contract shall comply with the requirements of the laws, and regulations and
requirements of the Party where the contract is executed.
The service contract shall comply with the requirements of the laws, and regulations and
requirements of the Party where the contract is executed.

EU/VN/en 89

(f)

(g)

(h)

(1)

executives, specialists or trainee employees;

"managers or executives" means natural persons working in a senior
position within a juridical person of a Party, who primarily direct the
management of the enterprise! in the other Party, and who are receiving
general supervision or direction principally from the board of directors or
from stockholders of the business or their equivalent, including at least:

(i) directing the enterprise or a department or sub-division thereof;

(ii) supervising and controlling the work of other supervisory,
professional or managerial employees; and

(iii) having the personal authority to recruit and dismiss or to
recommend recruitment, dismissal or other personnel-related
actions;

"qualifications" means diplomas, certificates and other evidence of
formal qualification issued by an authority designated pursuant to
legislative, regulatory or administrative provisions and certifying
successful completion of professional training;

"specialists" means natural persons working within a juridical person
possessing specialised knowledge essential to the establishments' areas of
activity, techniques or management; in assessing such knowledge,
account shall be taken not only of knowledge specific to the
establishment, but also of whether the person has a high level of
qualification including adequate professional experience referring to a
type of work or activity requiring specific technical knowledge, including
possible membership of an accredited profession; and

"trainee employees" means natural persons who have been employed by
a juridical person or its branch for at least one year, and who possess a
university degree and are temporarily transferred for career development
purposes or to obtain training in business techniques or methods.

For greater certainty, while managers or executives do not directly perform tasks concerning
the actual supply of the services, this does not prevent them, in the course of executing their
duties, from performing such tasks as may be necessary for the provision of the services.

The recipient enterprise may be required to submit a training programme covering the
duration of the stay for prior approval, demonstrating that the purpose of the stay is for
training. For Czechia, Germany, Spain, France, Hungary and Austria, training must be linked

EU/VN/en 90

ARTICLE 8.14
Business Visitors and Intra-Corporate Transferees

1. For the sectors liberalised in accordance with Section B (Liberalisation of
Investment), each Party shall allow investors of the other Party to employ in
their enterprises natural persons of that other Party provided that such
employees are business visitors or intra-corporate transferees.!

2. The entry and temporary stay shall be:

(a) for managers or executives, a period of up to three years;
(b) for specialists, a period of up to three years;

(c) for trainee employees, a period of up to one year; and

(d) for business visitors for establishment purposes, a period of up to 90
days.

3. For every sector liberalised in accordance with Section B (Liberalisation
of Investment), a Party shall not adopt or maintain, either on the basis of a
regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory, limitations on the
total number of natural persons that an investor may employ as business
visitors for establishment purposes and intra-corporate transferees in a specific
sector in the form of numerical quotas or a requirement of an economic needs
test and as discriminatory limitations, unless otherwise specified in Appendix
8-A-3 to Annex 8-A (The Union's Schedule of Specific Commitments) and
Appendix 8-B-2 to Annex 8-B (Viet Nam's Schedule of Specific
Commitments, respectively.

ARTICLE 8.15
Business Sellers

For every sector liberalised in accordance with Section B (Liberalisation of

to the university degree which has been obtained.

For Viet Nam, the obligations stemming from this Section in relation to trainee employees
shall enter into force three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

For the Union, the period of up to 90 days has to be within any 12-month period.

EU/VN/en 91

Investment) or Section C (Cross-Border Supply of Services) and subject to
any reservations listed in Appendix 8-A-3 to Annex 8-A (The Union's
Schedule of Specific Commitments) and Appendix 8-B-2 to Annex 8-B (Viet
Nam's Schedule of Specific Commitments), respectively, each Party shall
allow the entry and temporary stay of business sellers for a period of up to 90
days!.

ARTICLE 8.16
Contractual Service Suppliers

1. The Parties affirm their respective obligations arising from their
commitments under GATS with respect to the entry and temporary stay of
contractual services suppliers.

2. Each Party shall allow the supply of services into its territory by
contractual services suppliers of the other Party, subject to the conditions
specified in paragraph 3 and any reservations listed in Appendix 8-A-3 to
Annex 8-A (The Union's Schedule of Specific Commitments) and
Appendix 8-B-2. to Annex 8-B (Viet Nam's Schedule of Specific
Commitments), respectively, for the following sectors or sub-sectors:

(a) architectural services;

(b) urban planning and landscape architecture services;

(c) engineering services;

(d) integrated engineering services;

(e) computer and related services;

(f) higher education services (only privately funded services);
(g) foreign language training; and

(h) environmental services.

3. The commitments undertaken by the Parties are subject to the following
For the Union, the period of up to 90 days has to be within any 12-month period.

EU/VN/en 92

conditions:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

the natural persons shall be engaged in the supply of a service on a
temporary basis as employees of a juridical person, which has obtained a
service contract not exceeding 12 months;

the natural persons entering the other Party should be offering such
services as employees of the juridical person supplying the services for at
least two years immediately preceding the date of submission of an
application for entry into the other Party; in addition, the natural persons
shall possess, at the date of submission of an application for entry into the
other Party, at least five years professional experience! in the sector of
activity which is the subject of the contract;

the natural persons entering the other Party shall possess:

(i) a university degree or a qualification demonstrating knowledge of
an equivalent level; and

(ii) professional qualifications in the case that this is required to
exercise an activity pursuant to the laws, regulations or legal
requirements of the Party where the service is supplied;

the natural person shall not receive remuneration for the provision of
services in the territory of the other Party other than the remuneration
paid by the juridical person employing the natural person;

the entry and temporary stay of natural persons within the Party
concerned shall be for a cumulative period of not more than six months?
or for the duration of the contract, whichever is less;

access accorded under this Article relates only to the service activity
which is the subject of the contract and does not confer entitlement to
exercise the professional title of the Party where the service is provided;

For greater certainty, this period is calculated after the natural persons have reached the age
of majority.

If the degree or qualification has not been obtained in the Party where the service is supplied,
that Party may evaluate whether this degree or qualification is equivalent to a university
degree required in its territory.

For the Union, the cumulative period of not more than six months has to be within any
12-month period.

EU/VN/en 93

(g) the number of persons covered by the service contract shall not be larger
than necessary to fulfil the contract, as may be required by the laws and
regulations or other measures of the Party where the service is supplied;
and

(h) other discriminatory limitations, including on the number of natural
persons in the form of an economic needs test, specified in Appendix 8-
A-3 to Annex 8-A (The Union's Schedule of Specific Commitments) and
Appendix 8-B-2 to Annex 8-B (Viet Nam's Schedule of Specific
Commitments).

ARTICLE 8.17
Independent Professionals

Five years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall
review this Section to consider establishing the modalities to extend the
provisions therein to independent professionals.

SECTION E
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
SUB-SECTION 1
DOMESTIC REGULATION
ARTICLE 8.18
Scope and Definitions

1. This Sub-Section applies to measures by the Parties relating to licensing
requirements and procedures, qualification requirements and procedures that
affect:

(a) cross-border supply of services;

(b) establishment and maintenance of juridical or natural persons; and

EU/VN/en 94

(c) temporary stay in their respective territories of categories of natural
persons.

2. This Sub-Section only applies to sectors for which a Party has undertaken
specific commitments and to the extent that those specific commitments apply.

3. This Sub-Section does not apply to measures to the extent that they
constitute limitations as scheduled under Article 8.4 (Market Access), 8.5
(National Treatment), 8.10 (Market Access) or 8.11 (National Treatment).

4. For the purposes of this Section:

(a) "competent authority" means any central, regional or local government or
authority or non-governmental body in the exercise of powers delegated
by central or regional or local governments or authorities, which takes a
decision concerning the authorisation to supply a service, including
through establishment or concerning the authorisation to establish an
economic activity other than services;

(b) "licensing procedures" means administrative or procedural rules that a
natural or a juridical person, seeking authorisation to carry out the
activities as referred to in paragraph 1, including the amendment or
renewal of a licence, must adhere to in order to demonstrate compliance
with licensing requirements;

(c) "licensing requirements" means substantive requirements, other than
qualification requirements, with which a natural or a juridical person is
required to comply in order to obtain, amend or renew authorisation to
carry out the activities as referred to in paragraph 1;

(d) "qualification procedures" means administrative or procedural rules to
which a natural person must adhere in order to demonstrate compliance
with qualification requirements, for the purpose of obtaining
authorisation to supply a service; and

(e) "qualification requirements" means substantive requirements relating to
the competence of a natural person to supply a service, and which are
required to be demonstrated for the purpose of obtaining authorisation to
supply a service.

EU/VN/en 95

ARTICLE 8.19
Conditions for Licensing and Qualification

1. Each Party shall ensure that measures relating to licensing requirements
and procedures, as well as qualification requirements and procedures, are
based on criteria which are:

(a) clear;
(b) objective and transparent; and
(c) pre-established and accessible to the public and interested persons.

2. An authorisation or a licence shall, subject to availability, be granted as
soon as it is established, on the basis of an appropriate examination, that the
conditions for obtaining an authorisation or licence have been met.

3. Each Party shall maintain or institute judicial, arbitral or administrative
tribunals or procedures which provide, at the request of an affected investor or
service supplier, for a prompt review of, and where justified, appropriate
remedies for, administrative decisions affecting establishment, cross-border
supply of services or temporary presence of natural persons for business
purposes. Where such procedures are not independent of the authority
entrusted with the administrative decision concerned, each Party shall ensure
that the procedures provide for an objective and impartial review.

This paragraph shall not be construed as requiring a Party to institute such
tribunals or procedures where this would be inconsistent with its constitutional
structure or the nature of its legal system.

ARTICLE 8.20
Licensing and Qualification Procedures

1. Licensing and qualification procedures and formalities shall not in
themselves constitute a restriction on the supply of a service or the pursuit of
any other economic activity. Each Party shall endeavour to make such
procedures and formalities as simple as possible and shall ensure that such
procedures and formalities do not unduly complicate or delay the provision of

EU/VN/en 96

the service. Any licensing fees! which the applicants may incur from their
applications should be reasonable and shall not in themselves restrict the
supply of the relevant service.

2. Each Party shall ensure that the procedures used by, and the decisions of,
the competent authority in the licensing or authorisation process are impartial
with respect to all applicants. The competent authority should reach its
decisions in an independent manner and not be accountable to any person
supplying the services or carrying out the economic activities for which the
licence or authorisation is required.

3. In case specific time periods for applications exist in each Party's laws
and regulations, an applicant shall be allowed a reasonable period of time for
the submission of an application. The competent authority shall initiate the
processing of an application without undue delay. Where possible,
applications should be accepted in electronic format under the same conditions
of authenticity as paper submissions.

4. Each Party shall ensure that the processing of an application, including
the reaching of a final decision, is completed within a reasonable timeframe
after the date of the submission of a complete application. Each Party shall
endeavour to establish the normal timeframe for processing an application.

5. The competent authority shall inform the applicant within a reasonable
period of time after the receipt of an application which it considers
incomplete, identify, to the extent feasible, the additional information required
to complete the application, and provide the opportunity to correct
deficiencies.

6. Authenticated copies should be accepted, whenever possible, in place of
original documents.

7. If an application is rejected by the competent authority, the applicant
shall be informed in writing and without undue delay. In principle, the
applicant shall, upon formal request, also be informed of the reasons for
rejection of the application. An applicant should be permitted, within
reasonable time limits, to resubmit an application.

Licensing fees do not include payments for auction, tendering or other non-discriminatory
means of awarding concessions, or mandated contributions to universal service provision.

EU/VN/en 97

8. Each Party shall ensure that a licence or an authorisation, once granted,
enters into effect without undue delay in accordance with the terms and
conditions specified therein.

SUB-SECTION 2

PROVISIONS OF GENERAL APPLICATION

ARTICLE 8.21
Mutual Recognition of Professional Qualifications

1. Nothing in this Article shall prevent a Party from requiring that natural
persons possess the necessary qualifications and professional experience
specified in the territory where the service is supplied, for the sector of activity
concerned.

2. The Parties shall encourage the relevant professional bodies or respective
authorities, as appropriate, in their respective territories to develop and
provide a joint recommendation on mutual recognition of professional
qualifications to the Committee on Investment, Trade in Services, Electronic
Commerce and Government Procurement established pursuant to Article 17.2
(Specialised Committees). Such a joint recommendation shall be supported by
evidence of:

(a) the economic value of an envisaged agreement on mutual recognition of
professional qualifications (hereinafter referred to as "Mutual
Recognition Agreement"); and

(b) the compatibility of the respective regimes, such as the extent to which
the criteria applied by each Party for the authorisation, licensing,
operation and certification of entrepreneurs and service suppliers are
compatible.

3. Upon receipt of a joint recommendation, the Committee on Investment,
Trade in Services, Electronic Commerce and Government Procurement shall,
within a reasonable period of time, review the joint recommendation with a

EU/VN/en 98

view to determining whether it is consistent with this Agreement.

4. Where, on the basis of the information provided for in paragraph 2, the
joint recommendation has been found to be consistent with this Agreement,
the Parties shall take necessary steps to negotiate, through their competent
authorities or designees authorised by a Party, a Mutual Recognition
Agreement.

SUB-SECTION 3

COMPUTER SERVICES

ARTICLE 8.22
Understanding on Computer Services

1. To the extent that trade in computer services is liberalised in accordance
with Section B (Liberalisation of Investment), Section C (Cross-Border
Supply of Services) and Section D (Temporary Presence of Natural Persons
for Business Purposes), the Parties shall comply with paragraphs 2 to 4.

2. The Parties understand that CPC! 84, which is the United Nations code
used for describing computer and related services, covers the basic functions
used to provide all computer and related services. Technological
developments have led to the increased offering of these services as a bundle
or package of related services that can include some or all of these basic
functions. For example, services such as web or domain hosting, data mining
services and grid computing each consist of a combination of basic computer
services functions.

3. Computer and related services, regardless of whether they are delivered
via a network, including the Internet, include all services that provide:

(a) consulting, strategy, analysis, planning, specification, design,
development, installation, implementation, integration, _ testing,

! CPC means the Central Product Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United
Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, N 77, CPC prov, 1991.

EU/VN/en 99

debugging, updating, support, technical assistance, or management of or
for computers or computer systems;

(b) consulting, strategy, analysis, planning, specification, design,
development, installation, implementation, integration,  testing,
debugging, updating, adaptation, maintenance, support, technical
assistance, management or use of or for computer programmes;

(c) data processing, data storage, data hosting or database services;

(d) maintenance and repair services for office machinery and equipment,
including computers; or

(e) training services for staff of clients, relating to computer programmes,
computers or computer systems, and not elsewhere classified.

4. The Parties understand that, in many cases, computer and related services
enable the provision of other services! by both electronic and other means. In
these cases, it is important to distinguish between the computer and related
services, such as web-hosting or application hosting, and the other service
enabled by the computer and related service. The other service, regardless of
whether it is enabled by a computer and related service, is not covered by CPC
84.

SUB-SECTION 4
POSTAL SERVICES?
ARTICLE 8.23
Prevention of Anti-Competitive Practices in the Postal Services Sector

Each Party shall maintain or introduce appropriate measures for the purposes
of preventing suppliers who, alone or together, have the ability to affect
materially the terms of participation in the relevant markets for postal services
as a result of use of their position in the market, from engaging in or
continuing anti-competitive practices.

1 E.g., W/120.1.A.b. (accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services), W/120.1.A.d
(architectural services), W/120.1.A.h (medical and dental services), W/120.2.D (audiovisual
services), W/120.5. (educational services).

2 This Sub-Section applies to both CPC 7511 and CPC 7512.

EU/VN/en 100

ARTICLE 8.24
Licences

1. Where a Party requires a licence for providing postal services, it shall
make publicly available:

(a) all the licensing criteria and the period of time normally required to reach
a decision concerning an application for a licence; and

(b) the terms and conditions of such licence.

2. The reasons for the denial of a licence shall be made known to the
applicant upon request and an appeal procedure through a relevant regulatory
body shall be established by each Party. The appeal procedure shall be
transparent, non-discriminatory and based on objective criteria.

ARTICLE 8.25
Postal Regulatory Authority

The regulatory body shall be separate from, and not accountable to, any
supplier of postal services. The decisions of and the procedures used by the
regulatory body shall be impartial with respect to all market participants.

SUB-SECTION 5

TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS AND SERVICES

ARTICLE 8.26
Scope

1. This Sub-Section sets out principles of the regulatory framework for the
provision of public telecommunications networks and services, liberalised
pursuant to Section B (Liberalisation of Investment), Section C (Cross-Border
Supply of Services) and Section D (Temporary Presence of Natural Persons

EU/VN/en 101

for Business Purposes).

2.

This Sub-Section does not apply to any measure adopted or maintained

by a Party relating to broadcasting! or cable distribution of radio or television

programming.

ARTICLE 8.27

Definitions

For the purposes of this Sub-Section:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

"end user" means a final service consumer or a final service supplier to
whom a public telecommunications network or service is supplied, other
than for use in the further supply of a public telecommunications network
or service;

"essential facilities" means facilities of a public telecommunications
network and service that:

(i) are exclusively or predominantly provided by a single or limited
number of suppliers; and

(ii) cannot feasibly be economically or technically substituted in order
to provide a service;

"interconnection" means linking with suppliers providing public
telecommunications transport service in order to allow the users of one
supplier to communicate with users of another supplier and to access
services provided by another supplier;

"major supplier" means a supplier of public telecommunications services
which has the ability to materially affect the terms of participation,
having regard to price and supply, in the relevant market for public
telecommunications services as a result of control over essential facilities
or use of its position in the market;

"number portability" means the ability of end users of public

"Broadcasting" shall be defined as provided for in the relevant laws and regulations of each

EU/VN/en 102

telecommunications services who so request to retain, at the same
location, the same telephone numbers when switching between the same
category of suppliers of public telecommunications services;

(f) "public telecommunications network" means a_ telecommunications
network which a Party requires to provide public telecommunications
services between defined network termination points;

(g) "public telecommunications service" means any telecommunications
service that a Party requires, explicitly or in effect, to be offered to the
public generally;

(h) "regulatory authority" in the telecommunications sector means the body
or bodies charged by a Party with the regulation of telecommunications;

(1) "telecommunications network" means transmission systems and, where
applicable, switching or routing equipment and other resources, including
network elements which are not active, which permit the conveyance of
signals by wire, radio, optical, or other electromagnetic means;

(j) "telecommunications services" means all services consisting of the
transmission and reception of electro-magnetic signals but excludes
broadcasting services and economic activities consisting of the provision
of content which requires telecommunications for its transport; and

(k) "user" means a service consumer or a Service supplier.

ARTICLE 8.28
Regulatory Authority

1. The regulatory authority shall be separate from, and not accountable to,
any supplier of public telecommunications networks or services.

2. The decisions of and the procedures used by regulatory authorities shall
be impartial with respect to all market participants. To that end, a Party that
retains ownership or control of providers of telecommunications networks or
services shall ensure that regulatory actions, decisions or measures taken by

Party. For greater certainty, broadcasting does not cover contribution links between operators.

EU/VN/en 103

the regulatory authority with respect to such providers do not discriminate
against and, as a result, materially disadvantage any of their competitors.

3. The regulatory authority shall be sufficiently empowered to regulate the
sector, and have adequate financial and human resources to carry out the tasks
assigned to it.

4. The tasks to be undertaken by a regulatory authority shall be made public
in an easily accessible and clear form, in particular when those tasks are
assigned to more than one body.

5. The powers of the regulatory authority shall be exercised transparently
and in a timely manner.

6. Regulatory authorities shall have the power to ensure that suppliers of
telecommunications networks and services provide them, promptly upon
request, with all the information, including financial information, which is
necessary to enable the regulatory authorities to carry out their tasks in
accordance with this Sub-Section. The information requested shall be no more
than is necessary to allow the performance of the regulatory authorities' tasks
and treated in accordance with the requirements of confidentiality.

ARTICLE 8.29
Authorisation to Provide Telecommunications Networks and Services

1. Each Party shall ensure that licensing procedures should be publicly
available, including:

(a) all the licensing criteria, terms, conditions and procedures it applies; and

(b) the reasonable period of time normally required to reach a decision
concerning an application for a licence.

2. Each Party shall ensure that an applicant receives in writing, upon
request, the reasons for the denial of a licence.

3. The applicant for a licence shall be able to seek recourse before an appeal
body in case a licence has been denied.

EU/VN/en 104

4. Any licensing fees! which the applicants may incur from their application
to get a licence shall be reasonable and shall not in themselves restrict the
supply of the service.

ARTICLE 8.30
Scarce Resources

1. Any procedures for the allocation and use of scarce resources, including
frequencies, numbers and rights of way, shall be carried out in an objective,
timely, transparent and non-discriminatory manner.

2. The current state of allocated frequency bands shall be made publicly
available but detailed identification of radio spectrum allocated for specific
government uses shall not be required.

3. Decisions on allocating and assigning spectrum and _ frequency
management are not measures that are per se inconsistent with Article 8.4
(Market Access), Article 8.8 (Performance Requirements) and 8.10 (Market
Access). Accordingly, each Party retains the right to exercise its spectrum and
frequency management policies, which may affect the number of suppliers of
public telecommunications services, provided that this is done in a manner
that is consistent with this Chapter. The Parties also retain the right to allocate
frequency bands in a manner that takes into account existing and future needs.

ARTICLE 8.31
Access to and Use of Public Telecommunications Networks and Services

1. Each Party shall ensure that all service suppliers of the other Party have
access to, and use of, any public telecommunications network and service of a
major supplier, including private leased circuits, offered within or across the
borders of that Party on reasonable, non-discriminatory and transparent terms

Licensing fees do not include payments for auction, tendering or other non-discriminatory
means of awarding concessions, or mandated contributions to universal service provision.

For the purposes of this Article, the designation of a supplier of public telecommunications
networks and services as a major supplier shall be in accordance with the domestic laws,
regulations and procedures of each Party.

EU/VN/en 105

and conditions, including as set out in paragraphs 2 and 3.

2. Each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications
services requesting to have access to the network of a major supplier are
permitted to:

(a) purchase or lease, and attach, terminal or other equipment which
interfaces with the public telecommunications network;

(b) interconnect private leased or owned circuits with public
telecommunications networks and services in its territory, or across its
borders, or with circuits leased or owned by other service suppliers; and

(c) use operating protocols of their choice, other than as necessary to ensure
the availability of telecommunications networks and services to the
public generally.

3. Each Party shall ensure that all service suppliers of the other Party may
use public telecommunications networks and services for the movement of
information in its territory or across its borders, including for intra-corporate
communications of such service suppliers and for access to information
contained in databases or otherwise stored in machine-readable form in the
territory of either Party. Any new or amended measures of a Party
significantly affecting such use shall be notified to the other Party and shall be
subject to consultations.

4. Each Party shall ensure that suppliers that acquire information from
another supplier in the process of negotiating access use that information
solely for the purpose for which it was supplied and at all times respect the
confidentiality of information transmitted or stored.

ARTICLE 8.32
Interconnection

1. Each Party shall ensure that any suppliers of public telecommunications
services shall have the right, and when requested by another supplier, the
obligation, to negotiate interconnection with each other for the purposes of
providing public telecommunications networks and services.

EU/VN/en 106

2. Each Party shall ensure that suppliers that acquire information from
another supplier in the process of negotiating interconnection arrangements
use that information solely for the purpose for which it was supplied and at all
times respect the confidentiality of information transmitted or stored.

3. For public telecommunications services, each Party shall ensure
interconnection with a major! supplier at any technically feasible point in the
network. Such interconnection shall be provided:

(a) under non-discriminatory terms, conditions (including in relation to
technical standards and specifications) and rates, and of a quality no less
favourable than that provided for such major supplier's own like services,
or for like services of non-affiliated suppliers, or for its subsidiaries or
other affiliates;

(b) in a timely fashion, on terms, conditions (including in relation to
technical standards and specifications) and cost-oriented rates that are
transparent, reasonable, having regard to economic feasibility, and
sufficiently unbundled so that the supplier need not pay for network
components or facilities that it does not require for the service to be
provided; and

(c) upon request, at points in addition to the network termination points
offered to the majority of users, subject to charges that reflect the cost of
construction of necessary additional facilities.

4. The procedures applicable for interconnection to a major supplier shall be
made publicly available.

5. Major suppliers shall make publicly available either their interconnection
agreements or their reference interconnection offers where appropriate.

1 For the purposes of this Article, the designation of a supplier of public telecommunications

networks and services as a major supplier shall be in accordance with the domestic laws,
regulations and procedures of each Party.

EU/VN/en 107

ARTICLE 8.33
Competitive Safeguards on Major Suppliers

The Parties shall introduce or maintain appropriate measures for the purposes
of preventing suppliers who, alone or together, are a major supplier from
engaging in or continuing anti-competitive practices. These anti-competitive
practices in their territories include, in particular:

(a) engaging in anti-competitive cross-subsidisation;

(b) using information obtained from competitors with anti-competitive
results; and

(c) not making available to other services suppliers on a timely basis
technical information about essential facilities and commercially relevant
information which are necessary for them to provide services.

ARTICLE 8.34
Universal Service

1. Each Party shall have the right to define the kind of universal service
obligation it wishes to maintain. Each Party shall administer any universal
service obligation that it maintains in a transparent, non-discriminatory and
competitively neutral manner and shall ensure that its universal service
obligation is not more burdensome than necessary for the kind of universal
service that it has defined.

2. The designation of universal service suppliers shall be made through an
efficient, transparent and non-discriminatory mechanism.

ARTICLE 8.35
Number Portability

Each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications networks
or services in its territory provide number portability for mobile services and

EU/VN/en 108

any other services designated by that Party, to the extent technically and
economically feasible, on a timely basis and on reasonable terms and
conditions.

ARTICLE 8.36
Confidentiality of Information

Each Party shall ensure the confidentiality of telecommunications and related
traffic data by means of a public telecommunications network and publicly
available telecommunications services without restricting trade in services.

ARTICLE 8.37
Resolution of Telecommunications Disputes

1. in the event of a dispute arising between suppliers of telecommunications
networks or services in connection with rights and obligations that arise from
this Sub-Section, the regulatory authority concerned shall, at the request of
either party concerned, issue a binding decision to resolve the dispute in the
shortest possible timeframe and in any case within a reasonable period of time,
except in exceptional circumstances.

2. Where a dispute referred to in paragraph 1 concerns the cross-border
provision of services, the regulatory authorities concerned shall coordinate
their efforts in order to induce a resolution of the dispute.

3. The decision of the regulatory authority shall be made available to the
public, having regard to the requirements of business confidentiality. The
parties concerned shall be given a full statement of the reasons on which it is
based and shall have the right to appeal that decision in accordance with
paragraph 5.

4. The procedure referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not preclude
either party concerned from bringing an action before the courts.

5. Any user or supplier affected by the decision of a regulatory authority
shall have a right to appeal against that decision to an appeal body that is

EU/VN/en 109

independent of the party involved. This body, which may be a court, shall
have the appropriate expertise to carry out its functions effectively. The merits
of the case shall be duly taken into account and the appeal mechanism shall be
effective. Where the appeal body is not judicial in character, written reasons
for its decision shall always be given and its decisions shall also be subject to
review by an impartial and independent judicial authority. Decisions taken by
appeal bodies shall be effectively enforced. Pending the outcome of the
appeal, the decision of the regulatory authority shall stand, unless interim
measures are granted in accordance with the domestic laws and regulations.

ARTICLE 8.38
Co-location
1. Each Party shall ensure that major suppliers in its territory:

(a) provide to suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services
of the other Party that are facilities-based suppliers in the territory of that
Party, physical co-location of equipment necessary for interconnection;
and

(b) in situations where physical co-location referred to in subparagraph (a) is
not practical for technical reasons or because of space limitations,
cooperate with suppliers of public telecommunications networks or
services of the other Party that are facilities-based suppliers in the
territory of that Party to find and implement a practical and commercially
viable alternative solution.

2. Each Party shall ensure that major suppliers in its territory provide to
suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services the physical co-
location or practical and commercially viable alternative solution referred to in
paragraph 1 in a timely manner and on terms and conditions, including
technical standards and specifications, and at rates that are reasonable, having
regard to economic feasibility, non-discriminatory and transparent.

3. Each Party may determine, in accordance with its domestic laws and
regulations, the locations at which it requires major suppliers in its territory to
provide the physical co-location or the practical and commercially viable

EU/VN/en 110

alternative solution referred to in paragraph 1.

ARTICLE 8.39
Leased Circuits Services

Each Party shall, unless it is not technically feasible, ensure that major
suppliers in its territory make leased circuits services that are public
telecommunications services, available to suppliers of public
telecommunications networks or services of the other Party in a timely manner
and on terms and conditions, including technical standards and specifications,
and at rates that are reasonable, having regard to economic feasibility, non-
discriminatory and transparent.

ARTICLE 8.40
Unbundled Network Elements

Each Party shall ensure that their telecommunications regulatory authority has
the power to require major suppliers to meet reasonable requests by suppliers
of public telecommunications networks or services for access to, and use of,
specific network elements, on an unbundled basis, in a timely manner and on
terms and conditions that are reasonable, transparent, and non-discriminatory.
Each Party shall determine such specific network elements requested to be
made available in its territory in accordance with its domestic laws and
regulations.

SUB-SECTION 6
FINANCIAL SERVICES
ARTICLE 8.41
Scope and Definitions

1. This Sub-Section sets out the principles of the regulatory framework for

EU/VN/en 111

all financial services liberalised pursuant to Section B (Liberalisation of
Investment), Section C (Cross-Border Supply of Services) and Section D
(Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business Purposes).

2. For the purposes of this Sub-Section:

(a) "financial service" means any service of a financial nature offered by a
financial service supplier of a Party; financial services comprise the
following activities:

(i) insurance and insurance-related services:
(A) direct insurance (including co-insurance):
(1) life; and
(2) non-life;
(B) reinsurance and retrocession;
(C) insurance inter-mediation, such as brokerage and agency; and

(D) services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, actuarial,
risk assessment and claim settlement services;

(1) banking and other financial services (excluding insurance):

(A) acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the
public;

(B) lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage
credit, factoring and financing of commercial transaction;

(C) financial leasing;

(D) all payment and money transmission services, including credit,
charge and debit cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts;

(E) guarantees and commitments;

(F) trading for own account or for account of customers, whether
on an exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, of
the following:

EU/VN/en 112

(1) money market instruments (including cheques, bills,
certificates of deposits);

(2) foreign exchange;

(3) derivative products including, but not limited to, futures
and options;

(4) exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including
products such as swaps, forward rate agreements;

(5) transferable securities; and

(6) other negotiable instruments and _ financial assets,
including bullion;

(G) participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including
underwriting and placement as agent (whether publicly or
privately) and provision of services relating to such issues;

(H) money broking;

(I) asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all
forms of collective investment management, pension fund
management, custodial, depository and trust services;

(J) settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including
securities, derivative products, and other negotiable
instruments;

(K) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial
data processing and related software by suppliers of other
financial services; and

(L) advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary financial services
on all the activities listed in subparagraphs (A) to (K),
including credit reference and analysis, investment and
portfolio research and advice, advice on acquisitions and on
corporate restructuring and strategy;

(b) "financial service supplier" means any natural or juridical person of a
Party that seeks to provide or provides financial services but does not

EU/VN/en 113

(c)

(d)

(e)

1.

include a public entity;

"new financial service" means a service of a financial nature including
services relating to existing and new products or the manner in which a
product is delivered, which is not supplied by any financial service
supplier in the territory of a Party but which is supplied in the territory of
the other Party;

"public entity" means:

(i) a government, a central bank or a monetary authority, of a Party, or
an entity owned or controlled by a Party, that is principally engaged
in carrying out governmental functions or activities for
governmental purposes, not including an entity principally engaged
in supplying financial services on commercial terms; or

(ii) a private entity, performing functions normally performed by a
central bank or monetary authority, when exercising those functions;

and

"self-regulatory organisation" means any non-governmental body, any
securities or futures exchange or market, clearing agency, other
organisation or association, that exercises regulatory or supervisory
authority over financial service suppliers by statute or delegation from
central, regional or local governments or authorities, where applicable.

ARTICLE 8.42
Prudential Carve-Out

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as preventing a Party from

adopting or maintaining measures for prudential reasons, such as:

(a)

(b)

the protection of investors, depositors, policy-holders or persons to whom
a fiduciary duty is owed by a financial service supplier; or

ensuring the integrity and stability of a Party's financial system.

The measures referred to in paragraph | shall not be more burdensome

EU/VN/en 114

than necessary to achieve their aim.

3. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as requiring a Party to
disclose information relating to the affairs and accounts of individual
consumers or any confidential or proprietary information in the possession of
public entities.

4. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that internationally agreed
standards for regulation and supervision in financial services and for the fight
against tax evasion and avoidance are implemented and applied in its territory.
Such internationally agreed standards are, inter alia, the Core Principle for
Effective Banking Supervision of the Basel Committee, the Insurance Core
Principles of the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, the
Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation of the International
Organisation of Securities Commissions, the Agreement on Exchange of
Information on Tax Matters of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation
and Development, the Statement on Transparency and Exchange of
Information for Tax Purposes of the G20 and the Forty Recommendations on
Money Laundering and the Nine Special recommendations on Terrorist
Financing of the Financial Action Task Force.

5. The Parties take note of the Ten Key Principles for Information Exchange
promulgated by the Finance Ministers of the G7 Nations.

6. Without prejudice to other means of prudential regulation of cross-border
trade in financial services, a Party may require the registration or authorisation
of cross-border financial service suppliers of the other Party and of financial
instruments.

ARTICLE 8.43
Transparent Regulation

Each Party shall make available to interested persons its requirements for
completing applications relating to the supply of financial services.

Upon the request of an applicant, the Party concerned shall inform the
applicant of the status of its application. If the Party concerned requires
additional information from the applicant, it shall notify the applicant without

EU/VN/en 115

undue delay.

ARTICLE 8.44
New Financial Service

Each Party shall permit a financial service supplier of the other Party to
provide any new financial service that the former Party would permit its own
financial service suppliers to provide in accordance with its domestic laws and
regulations, in like situations, provided that the introduction of the new
financial service does not require a new law or modification of an existing
law. A Party may determine the institutional and legal form through which the
service may be provided and may require authorisation for the provision of the
service. Where such authorisation is required, a decision shall be made within
a reasonable time and the authorisation may only be refused for prudential
reasons.

ARTICLE 8.45
Data Processing

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain appropriate safeguards to protect
personal data and privacy, including individual records and accounts.

2. No later than two years from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement, each Party shall permit financial service suppliers! of the other
Party to transfer information in electronic or other form, into and out of its
territory, for data processing where such processing is required in the ordinary
course of business of such financial service suppliers.

3. Nothing in this Article restricts the right of a Party to protect personal
data and privacy, so long as such right is not used to circumvent this
Agreement.

For greater certainty, under the domestic laws and regulations of Viet Nam existing on the
date of signature of this Agreement no natural person may transfer data.

EU/VN/en 116

ARTICLE 8.46
Specific Exceptions

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing a Party,
including its public entities, from exclusively conducting or providing in its
territory activities or services forming part of a public retirement plan or
statutory system of social security, except when those activities may be carried
out, as provided by the Party's domestic laws and regulations, by financial
service suppliers in competition with public entities or private institutions.

2. Nothing in this Agreement, except for Section B (Liberalisation of
Investment) which is subject to paragraph 3, shall apply to activities
conducted by a central bank or monetary authority or by any other public
entity in pursuit of monetary policy or exchange rate policies.

3. Nothing in Section B (Liberalisation of Investment) shall apply to non-
discriminatory measures of general application taken by any public entity in
pursuit of monetary policy or exchange rate policy.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing a Party,
including its public entities, from exclusively conducting or providing in its
territory activities or services for the account, or with the guarantee or using
the financial resources of the Party, or its public entities, except when those
activities may be carried out, as provided by the Party's domestic laws and
regulations, by financial service suppliers in competition with public entities
or private institutions.

5. For greater certainty, the Parties understand that paragraphs | and 4 shall
not be construed as permitting the Parties to apply, without protecting the
rights of affected investors or investments, measures referred to in those
paragraphs when the activities or services mentioned therein have been
liberalised or may be carried out, as provided by the Party's domestic laws and
regulations, by financial services suppliers in competition with public entities
or private institutions.

EU/VN/en 117

ARTICLE 8.47
Self-Regulatory Organisations

When a Party requires membership of, participation in or access to any self-
regulatory organisation in order for financial service suppliers of the other
Party to supply financial services in or into the territory of the first Party, the
Party shall ensure observance of the obligations under Articles 8.5 (National
Treatment), 8.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) and 8.11 (National
Treatment).

ARTICLE 8.48
Clearing and Payment Systems

Under the terms and conditions that accord national treatment as provided for
in Articles 8.5 (National Treatment) and 8.11 (National Treatment), each Party
shall grant to financial service suppliers of the other Party established in its
territory access to payment and clearing systems operated by public entities,
and to official funding and refinancing facilities available in the normal course
of ordinary business. This Article shall not confer access to the Party's lender
of last resort facilities.

SUB-SECTION 7

INTERNATIONAL MARITIME TRANSPORT SERVICES

ARTICLE 8.49
Scope, Definitions and Principles

1. This Sub-Section sets out the principles regarding the liberalisation of
international maritime transport services pursuant to Section B (Liberalisation
of Investment), Section C (Cross-Border Supply of Services) and Section D
(Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business Purposes).

EU/VN/en 118

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

For the purposes of this Sub-Section:

"container station and depot services" means activities consisting in
storing containers, whether in port areas or inland, with a view to their
stuffing or stripping, repairing and making them available for shipments;

"customs clearance services" or alternatively, "customs house brokers'
services" means activities consisting in carrying out on behalf of another
party customs formalities concerning import, export or through transport
of cargoes, whether this service is the main activity of the service
provider or a usual complement of its main activity;

"feeder services" means the pre- and onward transportation by sea,
between ports located in the territory of a Party, of international cargo,
notably containerised, en route to a destination outside the territory of
that Party;

"freight forwarding services" means the activity consisting of organising
and monitoring shipment operations on behalf of shippers, through the
acquisition of transport and _ related services, preparation of
documentation and provision of business information;

"international cargo" means cargo transported between a port of one
Party and a port of the other Party or of a third country, or between a port
of one Member State of the Union and a port of another Member State of
the Union;

"international maritime transport services" means the transport of
passengers or cargo by sea-going vessels between a port of a Party and a
port of the other Party or of a third country including the direct
contracting with providers of other transport services, with a view to
cover multimodal transport operations under a single transport document,
but not the right to provide such other transport services;

"maritime auxiliary services" means maritime cargo handling services,
customs clearance services, container station and depot services,
maritime agency services and maritime freight forwarding services;

"maritime cargo handling services" means activities exercised by
stevedore companies, including terminal operators but not including the

EU/VN/en 119

(i)

3.

direct activities of dockers, when this workforce is organised
independently of the stevedoring or terminal operator companies; the
activities covered include the organisation and supervision of:

(i) the loading or discharging of cargo to or from a ship;
(ii) the lashing or unlashing of cargo; and

(i411) the reception or delivery and safekeeping of cargoes before
shipment or after discharge;

and

"multimodal transport operations" means the transport of cargo using
more than one mode of transport, involving an international sea-leg,
under a single transport document.

In view of the existing levels of liberalisation between the Parties in

international maritime transport the following principles apply:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

the Parties shall effectively apply the principle of unrestricted access to
the international maritime markets and trades on a commercial and non-
discriminatory basis;

each Party shall grant to ships flying the flag of the other Party or
operated by service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that accorded to its own ships, with regard to, inter alia,
access to ports, use of infrastructure and use of maritime auxiliary
services, as well as related fees and charges, customs facilities and access
to berths and facilities for loading and unloading;

each Party shall permit international maritime service suppliers of the
other Party to have an enterprise in its territory under conditions of
establishment and operation in accordance with the conditions set out in
its respective Schedule of Specific Commitments in Annex 8-A (The
Union's Schedule of Specific Commitments) or 8-B (Viet Nam's
Schedule of Specific Commitments);

the Parties shall make available to international maritime transport
suppliers of the other Party, on reasonable and non-discriminatory terms
and conditions, the following services at the port: pilotage, towing and

EU/VN/en 120

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

tug assistance, provisioning, fuelling and watering, garbage collecting
and ballast waste disposal, port captain's services, navigation aids,
emergency repair facilities, anchorage, berth and berthing services as
well as shore-based operational services essential to ship operations,
including communications, water and electrical supplies;

the Union, subject to the authorisation by its competent authorities, shall
permit the international maritime transport service suppliers of Viet Nam
to re-position their owned or leased empty containers which are not being
carried as cargo against payment and are transported for their use in
handling their cargo in foreign trade, between ports of a Member State of
the Union;

Viet Nam, subject to the authorisation by its competent authorities, shall
permit the international maritime transport service suppliers of the Union
or its Member States to reposition their owned or leased empty
containers, which are not being carried as cargo against payment and are
transported for their use in handling their cargo in foreign trade, between
Quy Nhon port and Cai Mep-Thi Vai port. After five years from the date
of entry into force of this Agreement, Viet Nam shall permit the
international maritime transport service suppliers of the Union or its
Member States to reposition owned or leased empty containers, which
are not being carried as cargo against payment and are transported for
their use in handling their cargo in foreign trade, between its national
ports with the condition that the fed vessels (namely mother vessels)
should call at ports of Viet Nam;

the Union, subject to the authorisation by its competent authorities, shall
permit international maritime transport service suppliers of Viet Nam to
provide feeder services between their national ports;

Viet Nam, subject to the authorisation by its competent authorities, shall

For greater certainty, an authorisation is an administrative procedure established to ensure all
relevant requirements are met. The authorisation shall be granted as soon as it is established,
in the light of an appropriate examination, that the conditions for obtaining an authorisation
have been met. The authorisation shall not act as a disguised restriction on supplying of the
services.

For greater certainty, an authorisation is an administrative procedure established to ensure all
relevant requirements are met. The authorisation shall be granted as soon as it is established,
in the light of an appropriate examination, that the conditions for obtaining an authorisation
have been met. The authorisation shall not act as a disguised restriction on supplying of the

EU/VN/en 121

permit international maritime transport service suppliers of the Union or
its Member States to provide feeder services between Quy Nhon port and
Cai Mep-Thi Vai port for their own vessels with the condition that the
fed vessels (namely mother vessels) should call at Cat Mep-Thi Vai port.

4. In applying the principles referred to in subparagraphs 3(a) and 3(b), the
Parties shall:

(a) not introduce cargo-sharing arrangements in future agreements with third
countries concerning maritime transport services, including dry and
liquid bulk and liner trade, and terminate, within a reasonable period of
time, such cargo-sharing arrangements in case they exist in previous
agreements; and

(b) abstain, upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement, from
introducing or applying any unilateral measures or administrative,
technical and other obstacles which could constitute a disguised
restriction or have discriminatory effects on the free supply of services in
international maritime transport.

SECTION F

ELECTRONIC COMMERCE

ARTICLE 8.50
Objective and Principles

The Parties, recognising that electronic commerce increases trade
opportunities in many sectors, shall promote the development of electronic
commerce between them, in particular by cooperating on the issues raised by
electronic commerce under the provisions of this Chapter.

services.

EU/VN/en 122

ARTICLE 8.51
Customs Duties

The Parties shall not impose customs duties on electronic transmissions.

ARTICLE 8.52
Regulatory Cooperation on Electronic Commerce

1. The Parties shall maintain a dialogue on regulatory issues raised by
electronic commerce, which shall, inter alia, address the following issues:

(a) the recognition of certificates of electronic signatures issued to the public
and the facilitation of cross-border certification services;

(b) the liability of intermediary service providers with respect to the
transmission or storage of information;

(c) the treatment of unsolicited electronic commercial communications;
(d) the protection of consumers in the ambit of electronic commerce; and
(e) any other issue relevant for the development of electronic commerce.

2. This dialogue may take the form of exchange of information on the
Parties' respective laws and regulations on the issues referred to in paragraph 1
as well as on the implementation of such laws and regulations.

SECTION G

EXCEPTIONS

ARTICLE 8.53
General Exceptions

Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner

EU/VN/en 123

which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination
between countries where like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on

establishment or operation of an enterprise or cross-border supply of services,
nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing the adoption or
enforcement by any Party of measures:

(a)

(b)
(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

necessary to protect public security or public morals or to maintain public
order;

necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such
measures are applied in conjunction with restrictions on domestic
investors or on the domestic supply or consumption of services;

necessary for the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or
archaeological value;

necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter including those relating
to:

(i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with
the effects of a default on contracts;

(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the
processing and dissemination of personal data and the protection of
confidentiality of individual records and accounts; or

(111) safety;
or

inconsistent with paragraph 1 or 2 of Article 8.5 (National Treatment) or
paragraph 1 of Article 8.11 (National Treatment), provided that the
difference in treatment is aimed at ensuring the effective or equitable
imposition or collection of direct taxes in respect of economic activities,
investors or services suppliers of the other Party.!

Measures that are aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or collection of
direct taxes include measures taken by a Party under its taxation system which:
(1) apply to non-resident investors and services suppliers in recognition of the fact that the

EU/VN/en 124

SECTION H
INSTITUTIONAL PROVISION
ARTICLE 8.54

Committee on Investment, Trade in Services,
Electronic Commerce and Government Procurement

1. The Committee on Investment, Trade in Services, Electronic Commerce
and Government Procurement established pursuant to Article 17.2
(Specialised Committees) shall be composed of representatives of the Parties.

2. The Committee on Investment, Trade in Services, Electronic Commerce
and Government Procurement shall be responsible for the implementation of
this Chapter. To that end it shall monitor and regularly review the
implementation by the Parties and consider any matter in relation to this
Chapter that is referred to it by a Party.

3. The responsibility for Chapter 9 (Government Procurement) is set out in
Article 9.23 (Committee on Investment, Services, Electronic Commerce and
Government Procurement).

tax obligation of non-residents is determined with respect to taxable items sourced or
located in the Party's territory;

(11) apply to non-residents in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes in the
Party's territory;

(111) apply to non-residents or residents in order to prevent the avoidance or evasion of
taxes, including compliance measures;

(iv) apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the territory of another Party in
order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes on such consumers derived from
sources in the Party's territory;

(v) distinguish investors and service suppliers subject to tax on worldwide taxable items
from other investors and service suppliers, in recognition of the difference in the nature
of the tax base between them; or

(vi) determine, allocate or apportion income, profit, gain, loss, deduction or credit of
resident persons or branches, or between related persons or branches of the same
person, in order to safeguard the Party's tax base.

Tax terms or concepts in subparagraph (f) and in this footnote are determined according to

tax definitions and concepts, or equivalent or similar definitions and concepts, under the

EU/VN/en 125

CHAPTER 9

GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT

ARTICLE 9.1

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

"commercial goods or services" means goods or services of a type
generally sold or offered for sale in the commercial marketplace to, and
customarily purchased by, non-governmental buyers for non-
governmental purposes;

"construction service" means a service that has as its objective the
realisation by whatever means of civil or building works based on
Division 51 of the United Nations Provisional Central Product
Classification (CPC);

"electronic auction" means an iterative process that involves the use of
electronic means for the presentation by suppliers of either new prices, or
new values for quantifiable non-price elements of the tender related to
the evaluation criteria, or both, resulting in a ranking or re-ranking of
tenders;

"government procurement" means the process by which a procuring
entity as defined in subparagraph (1) obtains the use of or acquires goods
or services, or any combination thereof, for governmental purposes and
not with a view to commercial sale or resale or use in the production or
supply of goods or services for commercial sale or resale;

"in writing" or "written" means any worded or numbered expression that
can be read, reproduced and later communicated, and may include
electronically transmitted and stored information;

"limited tendering" means a procurement method whereby the procuring
entity contacts a supplier or suppliers of its choice;

domestic laws and regulations of the Party taking the measure.

EU/VN/en 126

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(I)

(m)

(n)

(0)

(p)
(q)

(r)

"measure" means any law, regulation, administrative guidance or
practice, or any action of a procuring entity relating to a covered
procurement;

"multi-use list" means a list of suppliers that a procuring entity has
determined satisfy the conditions for participation in that list, and that the
procuring entity intends to use more than once;

"notice of intended procurement" means a notice published by a
procuring entity inviting interested suppliers to submit a request for
participation, a tender, or both;

"offset" means any condition or undertaking that encourages local
development or improves a Party's balance-of-payments accounts, such
as the use of domestic content, of domestic suppliers, the licensing and
transfer of technology, investment, counter-trade and similar action or
requirement;

"open tendering" means a procurement method whereby all interested
suppliers may submit a tender;

"procuring entity" means an entity covered under Annexes 9-A
(Coverage of Government Procurement for the Union) and 9-B
(Coverage of Government Procurement for Viet Nam);

"publish" means to disseminate information in paper format or by
electronic means that is distributed widely and is readily accessible to the
general public;

"qualified supplier" means a supplier that a procuring entity recognises as
having satisfied the conditions for participation;

"selective tendering" means a procurement method whereby only
qualified suppliers are invited by the procuring entity to submit a tender;

"services" includes construction services, unless otherwise specified;

"supplier" means a person or group of persons that provides or could
provide goods or services to a procuring entity; and

"technical specification" means a tendering requirement that:

EU/VN/en 127

1.

(a) sets out the characteristics of:

(i) goods to be procured, including quality, performance, safety
and dimensions, or the processes and methods for their
production; or

(11) services to be procured, including quality, performance and
safety or the processes or methods for their provision;

Or

(b) addresses terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labelling
requirements, as they apply to a good or service.

ARTICLE 9.2
Scope and Coverage

This Chapter applies to any measure regarding covered procurement,

whether or not it is conducted exclusively or partially by electronic means.

2.

For the purposes of this Chapter, "covered procurement" means

government procurement:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

of goods, services, or any combination thereof, as specified in Annexes
9-A (Coverage of Government Procurement for the Union) and 9-B
(Coverage of Government Procurement for Viet Nam);

by any contractual means, including purchase, lease, and rental, with or
without an option to buy;

for which the value, as estimated in accordance with paragraphs 6 and 7,
equals or exceeds the relevant threshold specified in Annexes 9-A
(Coverage of Government Procurement for the Union) and 9-B
(Coverage of Government Procurement for Viet Nam), at the time of
publication of a notice in accordance with Article 9.6 (Notices); and

that is not otherwise excluded from coverage pursuant to paragraph 3 or
Annexes 9-A (Coverage of Government Procurement for the Union) and
9-B (Coverage of Government Procurement for Viet Nam), or by the

EU/VN/en 128

3.

effect of any other relevant parts of this Agreement.

Except where provided otherwise in Annexes 9-A (Coverage of

Government Procurement for the Union) and 9-B (Coverage of Government

Procurement for Viet Nam), this Chapter does not apply to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)

the acquisition or rental of land, existing buildings or other immovable
property or the rights thereon;

non-contractual agreements or any form of assistance that a Party,
including its procuring entities, provides, including cooperative
agreements, grants, subsidies, loans, equity infusions, guarantees, fiscal
incentives, and contributions in kind;

the procurement or acquisition of fiscal agency or depository services,
liquidation and management services for regulated financial institutions
or services related to the sale, redemption and distribution of public debt,
including loans and government bonds, notes and other securities;

public employment contracts; and
procurement conducted:

(i) for the specific purpose of providing international assistance,
including development aid;

(41) under the particular procedure or condition of an international
organisation or funded by international or foreign grants, loans or
other assistance where the recipient Party, including its procuring
entities, is bound to apply particular procedures or conditions
imposed by the international organisation or other donors for the
benefit of their international or foreign grants, loans or other
assistance; where the procedures or conditions of the international
organisation or donor do not restrict the participation of suppliers,
the procurement shall be subject to paragraphs | and 2 of Article 9.4
(General Principles); or

(i411) under the particular procedure or condition of an international
agreement relating to the stationing of troops or relating to the joint
implementation by the signatory countries of a project.

EU/VN/en 129

4. Annex 9-A (Coverage of Government Procurement for the Union) and
Annex 9-B (Coverage of Government Procurement for Viet Nam) specify in
its Sections the following information for each Party:

(a) in Section A, the central government entities whose procurement is
covered by this Chapter;

(b) in Section B, the sub-central government entities whose procurement is
covered by this Chapter;

(c) in Section C, other entities whose procurement is covered by this
Chapter;

(d) in Section D, the goods covered by this Chapter;

(e) in Section E, the services, other than construction services, covered by
this Chapter;

(f) in Section F, the construction services covered by this Chapter;
(g) in Section G, any general notes; and
(h) in Section H, the means for publishing the procurement information.

5. Transitional measures for Viet Nam for the application of this Chapter
are set out in Section I (Transitional Measures) of Annex 9-B (Coverage of
Government Procurement for Viet Nam).

6. If the domestic legislation of a Party allows a covered procurement to be
carried out on behalf of the procuring entity by other entities or persons whose
procurement is not covered with respect to the goods and services concerned,
the provisions of this Chapter equally apply.

Valuation

7. In estimating the value of a procurement for the purpose of ascertaining
whether it is a covered procurement, a procuring entity shall:

(a) neither divide a procurement into separate procurements nor select or use
a particular valuation method for estimating the value of a procurement
with the intention of totally or partially excluding it from the application
of this Chapter; and

EU/VN/en 130

(b) include the estimated maximum total value of the procurement over its
entire duration, whether this procurement is awarded to one or more
suppliers at the same time or over a given period of time, taking into
account all forms of remuneration, including:

(1) premiums, fees, commissions and interest; and
(ii) the total value of any option clause.

8. For recurring contracts that consist, due to an individual requirement of
the procurement, in awarding more than one contract, or in awarding contracts
in separate parts, the calculation of the estimated maximum total value shall be
based on:

(a) the value of recurring contracts of the same type of good or service
awarded during the preceding 12 months or the procuring entity's
preceding fiscal year, adjusted, where possible, to take into account
anticipated changes in the quantity or value of the good or service being
procured over the following 12 months; or

(b) the estimated value of recurring contracts of the same type of good or
service to be awarded during the 12 months following the initial contract
award or the procuring entity's fiscal year.

ARTICLE 9.3
Security and General Exceptions

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as preventing a Party from
taking any action or not disclosing any information that it considers necessary
for the protection of its essential security interests relating to the procurement
of arms, ammunition or war materials, or to procurement indispensable for
national security or for national defence purposes.

2. Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner
which would constitute a disguised restriction on international trade, nothing
in this Agreement shall be construed as preventing a Party from imposing or
enforcing measures:

EU/VN/en 131

(a) necessary to protect public morals, order or safety;
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
(c) necessary to protect intellectual property; or

(d) relating to goods or services of persons with disabilities, philanthropic
institutions, non-profit institutions carrying out philanthropic activities,
or prison labour.

ARTICLE 9.4
General Principles
National Treatment and Non-Discrimination

1. With respect to any measure regarding covered procurement, each Party,
including its procuring entities, shall accord immediately and unconditionally
to the goods and services of the other Party and to the suppliers of the other
Party offering the goods or services of both Parties, treatment no less
favourable than the treatment the Party, including its procuring entities,
accords to domestic goods, services and suppliers.

2. With respect to any measure regarding covered procurement, a Party,
including its procuring entities, shall not:

(a) treat a locally established supplier less favourably than another locally
established supplier on the basis of the degree of foreign affiliation or
ownership; or

(b) discriminate against a locally established supplier on the basis that the
goods or services offered by that supplier for a particular procurement are
goods or services of the other Party.

Compliance and Conduct of Procurement

3. Each Party shall ensure that its procuring entities comply with this
Chapter in conducting covered procurements.

4. A procuring entity shall conduct covered procurement in a transparent

EU/VN/en 132

and impartial manner that:

(a) is consistent with this Chapter, by using one of the following methods of
open tendering, selective tendering or limited tendering; and

(b) avoids conflicts of interest and prevents corrupt practices, in accordance
with relevant domestic laws and regulations.

5. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party, including its procuring
entities, from developing new procurement policies, procedures, or contractual
means, provided that they are not inconsistent with this Chapter.

Use of Electronic Means

6. The Parties shall endeavour to conduct covered procurement by
electronic means. This includes the publication of procurement information,
notices and tender documentation, the reception of tenders and, where
appropriate, the use of electronic auctions.

7. When conducting covered procurement by electronic means, a procuring
entity shall:

(a) ensure that the procurement is conducted using information technology
systems and software, including those related to authentication and
encryption of information, that are generally available and interoperable
with other generally available information technology systems and
software; and

(b) maintain mechanisms that ensure the integrity of requests for
participation and tenders, including the establishment of the time of
receipt and the prevention of inappropriate access.

Rules of Origin

8. A Party shall not apply to covered procurement of goods or services
imported or supplied from the other Party rules of origin that are different
compared to the rules of origin it applies at the same time in the normal course
of trade to imports or supplies of the same goods or services from the same
Party.

Offsets

EU/VN/en 133

9.

With regard to covered procurement and subject to Annexes 9-A

(Coverage of Government Procurement for the Union) and 9-B (Coverage of
Government Procurement for Viet Nam), a Party, including its procuring

entities, shall not seek, take account of, impose or enforce any offset.

Measures Not Specific to Procurement

10.

(a)

(b)
(c)

(a)

(b)

2.

Paragraphs | and 2 do not apply to:

customs duties and charges of any kind imposed on, or in connection
with, importation;

the method of levying such duties and charges; and

other import regulations or formalities and measures affecting trade in
services other than measures governing covered procurement.

ARTICLE 9.5
Information on the Procurement System
Each Party shall:

promptly publish any measure of general application, including standard
contract terms mandated by law or regulation, regarding covered
procurement in officially designated paper or electronic medium; and

provide upon request of the other Party, to the extent possible, an
explanation thereof.

Section H (Publication of Procurement Information) of Annexes 9-A

(Coverage of Government Procurement for the Union) and 9-B (Coverage of
Government Procurement for Viet Nam) lists the paper or electronic medium
through which the Party publishes the information described in paragraph 1

and the notices required by Article 9.6 (Notices), paragraph 7 of Article 9.8
(Qualification of Suppliers) and paragraph 3 of Article 9.17 (Post-Award
Information).

EU/VN/en 134

ARTICLE 9.6
Notices
Notice of Intended Procurement

1. For each covered procurement, except in the circumstances referred to in
Article 9.14 (Limited Tendering), a procuring entity shall publish a notice of
intended procurement in the appropriate paper or electronic medium listed in
Section H (Publication of Procurement Information) of Annexes 9-A
(Coverage of Government Procurement for the Union) and 9-B (Coverage of
Government Procurement for Viet Nam). A notice published in an electronic
medium shall remain available at least until expiration of the time period
indicated in the notice. The notices shall:

(a) for procuring entities covered by Section A (Central Government
Entities), be accessible by electronic means free of charge through a
single point of access specified in Section H (Publication of Procurement
Information); and

(b) for procuring entities covered by Section B (Sub-Central Government
Entities) or C (Other Covered Entities), where accessible by electronic
means, be provided, at least, through links in a single gateway electronic
site that is accessible free of charge.

The Parties, including their procuring entities covered by Section B (Sub-
Central Government Entities) or C (Other Covered Entities), are encouraged to
publish their notices by electronic means free of charge through a single point
of access.

2. Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, each notice of intended
procurement shall include:

(a) the name and address of the procuring entity and other information
necessary to contact the procuring entity and obtain all relevant
documents relating to the procurement, including information on the cost
and terms of payment for obtaining those documents, if any;

(b) a description of the procurement, including the nature and the quantity of
the goods or services to be procured or, where the quantity is not known,
the estimated quantity;

EU/VN/en 135

(c)

(d)
(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)
(i)

(j)

(k)

(1)

if possible, for recurring contracts, an estimate of the timing of
subsequent notices of intended procurement;

where appropriate, a description of any options;

the time frame for delivery of goods or services or the duration of the
contract;

the procurement method that will be used and, where appropriate,
whether it will involve negotiation or electronic auction;

where applicable, the address and any final date for the submission of
requests for participation in the procurement;

the address and final date for the submission of tenders;

the language or languages in which tenders or requests for participation
may be submitted, if they may be submitted in a language other than the
official language at the place of the procuring entity;

a list and brief description of any conditions for participation of suppliers,
including, where appropriate, any requirements for specific documents or
certifications to be provided by suppliers in connection therewith, unless
such requirements are included in tender documentation that is made
available to all interested suppliers at the same time as the notice of
intended procurement;

where, pursuant to Article 9.8 (Qualification of Suppliers), a procuring
entity intends to select a limited number of qualified suppliers to be
invited to tender, the criteria that will be used to select them and, where
applicable, any limitation on the number of suppliers that will be
permitted to tender; and

an indication that the procurement is covered by this Chapter.

Summary Notice

3.

For each case of intended procurement, a procuring entity shall publish a

summary notice in English that is readily accessible free of charge through an

electronic medium listed in SectionH (Publication of Procurement
Information) of Annexes 9-A (Coverage of Government Procurement for the

EU/VN/en 136

Union) and 9-B (Coverage of Government Procurement for Viet Nam), at the
same time as the publication of the notice of intended procurement. The
summary notice shall contain at least the following information:

(a) the subject-matter of the procurement;

(b) the final date for the submission of tenders or, where applicable, any final
date for the submission of requests for participation in the procurement or
for inclusion on a multi-use list; and

(c) the address from which documents relating to the procurement may be
requested.

4. The Union shall provide technical and financial assistance to Viet Nam in
order to develop, establish and maintain an automatic system for the
translation and publication of summary notices in English. This cooperation is
addressed in Article 9.21 (Cooperation). The implementation of this paragraph
is subject to the realisation of the initiative on technical and financial
assistance for the development, establishment and maintenance of an
automatic system for the translation and publication of summary notices in
English in Viet Nam.

Notice of Planned Procurement

5. Procuring entities are encouraged to publish as early as possible in each
fiscal year a notice regarding their future procurement plans (hereinafter
referred to as "notice of planned procurement"), which should include the
subject-matter of the procurement and the planned date of the publication of
the notice of intended procurement.

6. A procuring entity covered by Section B (Sub-Central Government
Entities) or C (Other Covered Entities) may use a notice of planned
procurement as a notice of intended procurement provided that the notice of
planned procurement includes as much of the information referred to in
paragraph 2 as is available to the procuring entity, and a statement that
interested suppliers should express their interest in the procurement to the
procuring entity.

EU/VN/en 137

1.

ARTICLE 9.7
Conditions for Participation

A procuring entity shall limit any conditions for participation in a

covered procurement to those that ensure that a supplier has the legal and
financial capacities and the commercial and technical abilities to undertake

that procurement.

2.

(a)

(b)

3.

In establishing the conditions for participation, a procuring entity:

shall not impose the condition that, in order for a supplier to participate in
a procurement, the supplier has previously been awarded one or more
contracts by a procuring entity of a given Party or that the supplier has
prior work experience in the territory of that Party;

may require relevant prior experience where essential to meet the
requirements of the procurement.

In assessing whether a supplier satisfies the conditions for participation,

the procuring entity:

(a)

(b)

4.

shall evaluate the financial capacity and the commercial and technical
abilities of a supplier on the basis of that supplier's business activities
both inside and outside the territory of the Party of the procuring entity;
and

shall base its evaluation solely on the conditions that the procuring entity
has specified in advance in notices or tender documentation.

Where there is supporting evidence, a Party, including its procuring

entities, may exclude a supplier on grounds such as:

(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

bankruptcy;
false declarations;

significant or persistent deficiencies in performance of any substantive
requirement or obligation under a prior contract or contracts;

final judgments by a judicial court in respect of serious crimes or other
serious offences;

EU/VN/en 138

(e) evidence of serious professional misconduct; or

(f) failure to pay taxes.

ARTICLE 9.8
Qualification of Suppliers
Registration Systems and Qualification Procedures

1. A Party may maintain a supplier registration system under which
interested suppliers are required to register and provide certain information.

2. Each Party shall ensure that:

(a) its procuring entities make efforts to minimise differences in their
qualification procedures; and

(b) where its procuring entities maintain registration systems, the entities
make efforts to minimise differences in their registration systems.

3. A Party shall not adopt or apply any registration system or qualification
procedure:

(a) with the purpose or the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to the
participation of suppliers of the other Party in its procurement; or

(b) use such registration system or qualification procedure to prevent or
delay the inclusion of suppliers of the other Party on a list of suppliers or
to prevent such suppliers from being considered for a particular
procurement.

Selective Tendering

4. Where a procuring entity intends to use selective tendering, the procuring
entity shall:

(a) include in the notice of intended procurement at least the information
specified in subparagraphs 2(a), 2(b), 2(f), 2(g), 2(j), 2(k) and 2(1) of
Article 9.6 (Notices) and invite suppliers to submit a request for
participation; and

EU/VN/en 139

(b) provide, by the commencement of the time period for tendering, at least
the information in subparagraphs 2(c), 2(d), 2(e), 2(h) and 2(i) of Article
9.6 (Notices) to the qualified suppliers that it notifies as specified in
subparagraph 3(b) of Article 9.12 (Time Periods).

5. The procuring entity shall:

(a) publish the notice sufficiently in advance of the procurement to allow for
interested suppliers to request participation in the procurement; and

(b) allow all qualified suppliers to submit a tender, unless the procuring
entity has stated in the notice of intended procurement a limitation on the
number of suppliers that will be permitted to tender and the criteria for
selecting the limited number of suppliers.

6. Where the tender documentation is not made publicly available from the
date of publication of the notice referred to in paragraph 4, a procuring entity
shall ensure that those documents are made available at the same time to all
the qualified suppliers selected in accordance with paragraph 5.

Multi-Use Lists

7. A procuring entity may maintain a multi-use list of suppliers, provided
that a notice inviting interested suppliers to apply for inclusion on the list is:

(a) published annually; and
(b) where published by electronic means, made available continuously,

in the appropriate medium listed in Section H (Publication of Procurement
Information) of Annexes 9-A (Coverage of Government Procurement for the
Union) and 9-B (Coverage of Government Procurement for Viet Nam).

8. The notice provided for in paragraph 7 shall include:

(a) a description of the goods or services, or categories thereof, for which the
list may be used;

(b) the conditions for participation to be satisfied by suppliers for inclusion
on the list and the methods that the procuring entity will use to verify that
a supplier satisfies the conditions;

EU/VN/en 140

(c) the name and address of the procuring entity and other information
necessary to contact the procuring entity and obtain all relevant
documents relating to the list;

(d) the period of validity of the list and the means for its renewal or
termination, or where the period of validity is not provided, an indication
of the method by which notice will be given of the termination of use of
the list; and

(e) an indication that the list may be used for procurement covered by this
Chapter.

9. Notwithstanding paragraph 7, where a multi-use list is valid for three
years or less, a procuring entity may publish the notice referred to in
paragraph 7 only once, at the beginning of the period of validity of the list,
provided that the notice:

(a) states the period of validity and that further notices will not be published;
and

(b) is published by electronic means and is made available continuously
during the period of its validity.

10. A procuring entity shall allow all suppliers included in a multi-use list to
submit tenders for a relevant procurement.

11. A procuring entity shall allow suppliers to apply at any time for inclusion
on a multi-use list and shall include on the list all qualified suppliers within a
reasonably short time.

12. Where a supplier that is not included on a multi-use list submits a request
for participation in a procurement based on a multi-use list and all required
documents within the time period provided for in paragraph 2 of Article 9.12
(Time Periods), a procuring entity shall examine the request. The procuring
entity shall not exclude the supplier from consideration in respect of the
procurement on the grounds that the procuring entity has insufficient time to
examine the request, unless, in exceptional cases, due to the complexity of the
procurement, the procuring entity is not able to complete the examination of
the request within the time period allowed for the submission of tenders.

Sub-Central Government and other Covered Entities

EU/VN/en 141

13. A procuring entity covered by Section B (Sub-Central Government
Entities) or C (Other Covered Entities) of Annexes 9-A (Coverage of
Government Procurement for the Union) and 9-B (Coverage of Government
Procurement for Viet Nam) may use a notice inviting suppliers to apply for
inclusion on a multi-use list as a notice of intended procurement, provided
that:

(a) the notice is published in accordance with paragraph 7 and includes the
information required under paragraph 8, as much of the information
required under paragraph 2 of Article 9.6 (Notices) as is available, and a
statement that it constitutes a notice of intended procurement or that only
the suppliers on the multi-use list will receive further notices of
procurement covered by the multi-use list; and

(b) the procuring entity promptly provides to suppliers that have expressed
an interest in a given procurement to the procuring entity sufficient
information to permit them to assess their interest in the procurement,
including all remaining information required under paragraph 2 of Article
9.6 (Notices), to the extent such information is available.

14. A procuring entity covered by Section B (Sub-Central Government
Entities) or C (Other Covered Entities) of Annexes 9-A (Coverage of
Government Procurement for the Union) and 9-B (Coverage of Government
Procurement for Viet Nam) may allow a supplier that has applied for inclusion
on a multi-use list in accordance with paragraph 11 to tender in a given
procurement where there is sufficient time for the procuring entity to examine
whether the supplier satisfies the conditions for participation.

Information on Procuring Entity Decisions

15. A procuring entity shall promptly inform any supplier that submits a
request for participation in a procurement or application for inclusion on a
multi-use list of the procuring entity's decision with respect to the request or
application.

16. Where a procuring entity rejects a supplier's request for participation in a
procurement or application for inclusion on a multi-use list, ceases to
recognise a supplier as qualified, or removes a supplier from a multi-use list,
the procuring entity shall promptly inform the supplier and, on request of the
supplier, promptly provide the supplier with a written explanation of the

EU/VN/en 142

reasons for its decision.

ARTICLE 9.9
Technical Specifications

1. A procuring entity shall not prepare, adopt or apply any technical
specification or prescribe any conformity assessment procedure with the
purpose or the effect of creating an unnecessary obstacle to trade between the
Parties.

2. In prescribing the technical specifications for the goods or services being
procured, a procuring entity shall, where appropriate:

(a) set out the technical specification in terms of performance and functional
requirements, rather than design or descriptive characteristics; and

(b) base the technical specification on international standards, where they
exist; otherwise, on national technical regulations, recognised national
standards or building codes.

3. Where design or descriptive characteristics are used in the technical
specifications, a procuring entity shall indicate that it will consider tenders of
equivalent goods or services that demonstrably fulfil the requirements of the
procurement by including words such as "or equivalent" in the tender
documentation.

4. A procuring entity shall not prescribe technical specifications that require
or refer to a particular trademark or trade name, patent, copyright, design,
type, specific origin, producer or supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently
precise or intelligible way of describing the procurement requirements and
provided that, in such cases, the procuring entity includes words such as "or
equivalent" in the tender documentation.

5. A procuring entity shall not seek or accept, in a manner that would have
the effect of precluding competition, advice that may be used in the
preparation or adoption of any technical specification for a_ specific
procurement from a person that may have a commercial interest in the
procurement.

EU/VN/en 143

6. For greater certainty, a Party, including its procuring entities, may, in
accordance with this Article, prepare, adopt or apply technical specifications
to promote the conservation of natural resources or protect the environment.

ARTICLE 9.10
Market Consultations

1. Before launching a procurement, procuring entities may conduct market
consultations with a view to preparing the procurement, notably for the
development of technical specifications, provided that, where market research
is performed by a supplier in the context of covered procurement, such
procurement is subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

2. For that purpose, procuring entities may seek or accept advice from
independent experts or authorities or from market participants. That advice
may be used in the planning and conduct of the procurement procedure,
provided that it does not have the effect of distorting competition and does not
result in a violation of the principles of non-discrimination and transparency.

ARTICLE 9.11
Tender Documentation

1. A procuring entity shall promptly make available or provide upon request
to suppliers tender documentation that includes all information necessary to
permit suppliers to prepare and submit responsive tenders. Unless already
provided in the notice of intended procurement, such documentation shall
include a complete description of:

(a) the procurement, including the nature and quantity of the goods or
services to be procured or, where the quantity is not known, the estimated
quantity, and any requirements to be fulfilled, including any technical
specifications, conformity certification, plans, drawings or instructional
materials;

(b) any conditions for participation of suppliers, including a list of

EU/VN/en 144

information and documents that suppliers are required to submit in
connection with the conditions for participation;

(c) all evaluation criteria to be applied in the awarding of the contract and,
except where price is the sole criterion, the relative importance of such
criteria;

(d) where the procuring entity will conduct the procurement by electronic
means, any authentication and encryption requirements or any other
requirements related to the submission of information by electronic
means, provided that there are such requirements;

(e) where the procuring entity will hold an electronic auction, the rules,
including identification of the elements of the tender related to the
evaluation criteria, according to which the auction will be conducted;

(f) where there will be a public opening of tenders, the date, time and place
for the opening of tenders and, if the domestic legislation of a Party
stipulates that only certain persons are authorised to be present, the
indication of those persons;

(g) any other terms or conditions, including terms of payment and any
limitation on the means by which tenders may be submitted, such as
whether on paper or by electronic means; and

(h) any dates for the delivery of goods or the supply of services.

2. In establishing any date for the delivery of goods or the supply of
services being procured, a procuring entity shall take into account, where
appropriate, such factors as the complexity of the procurement, the extent of
subcontracting anticipated and the realistic time required for production, de-
stocking and transport of goods from the point of supply or for supply of
services.

3. The evaluation criteria set out in the notice of intended procurement or
tender documentation may include, inter alia, price and other cost factors,
quality, technical merit, environmental characteristics and terms of delivery.

4. A procuring entity shall promptly reply to any reasonable request for
relevant information by any interested or participating supplier, provided that
such information does not give that supplier an advantage over other suppliers.

EU/VN/en 145

Modifications

5. If, prior to the award of a contract, a procuring entity modifies the
evaluation criteria or requirements set out in the notice of intended
procurement or tender documentation provided to participating suppliers, or
amends or reissues a notice or tender documentation, it shall transmit in
writing all such modifications or amended or re-issued notice or tender
documentation:

(a) to all suppliers that are participating at the time of the modification,
amendment or re-issuance, if such suppliers are known to the procuring
entity, or otherwise publish or provide such documents in the same
manner as the original information was made available; and

(b) in adequate time to allow such suppliers to modify their initial tenders
and submit amended tenders, as appropriate.

ARTICLE 9.12
Time Periods
General

1. A procuring entity shall, consistent with its own reasonable needs,
provide sufficient time for suppliers to obtain the tender documentation and to
prepare and submit requests for participation and responsive tenders, taking
into account such factors as:

(a) the nature and complexity of the procurement;
(b) the extent of subcontracting anticipated; and

(c) the time necessary for transmitting tenders by non-electronic means from
foreign as well as domestic points where electronic means are not used.

Such time periods, including any extension thereof, shall be the same for all
interested or participating suppliers.

Deadlines

EU/VN/en 146

2. A procuring entity that uses selective tendering shall establish that the
final date for the submission of requests for participation shall not, in
principle, be less than 25 days from the date of publication of the notice of
intended procurement. In case of a state of urgency, duly substantiated by the
procuring entity, that renders this time period impracticable, the time period
may be reduced to not less than 10 days.

3. Except as provided for in paragraphs 4, 5 and 7, a procuring entity shall
establish that the final date for the submission of tenders shall not be less than
40 days from the date on which:

(a) in the case of open tendering, the notice of intended procurement is
published; or

(b) in the case of selective tendering, the procuring entity notifies suppliers
that they will be invited to submit tenders, whether or not it uses a multi-
use list.

4. A procuring entity may reduce the time period for tendering established
in accordance with paragraph 3 to not less than 10 days if:

(a) the procuring entity has published a notice of planned procurement as
described in paragraph 5 of Article 9.6 (Notices) at least 40 days and not
more than 12 months in advance of the publication of the notice of
intended procurement, and the notice of planned procurement contains:

(i) a description of the procurement;

(ii) the approximate final dates for the submission of tenders or requests
for participation;

(111) a statement that interested suppliers should express their interest in
the procurement to the procuring entity;

(iv) the address from which documents relating to the procurement may
be obtained; and

(v) as much of the information that is required for the notice of intended
procurement under paragraph 2 of Article 9.6 (Notices), as is
available;

EU/VN/en 147

(b) the procuring entity, for recurring contracts, indicates in an initial notice
of intended procurement that subsequent notices will provide time
periods for tendering based on this paragraph;

(c) the procuring entity procures commercial goods or services; or

(d) a state of urgency, duly substantiated by the procuring entity, renders
impracticable the time period for tendering established in accordance
with paragraph 3.

5. A procuring entity may reduce the time period for tendering established
in accordance with paragraph 3 by five days for each one of the following
circumstances:

(a) the notice of intended procurement is published by electronic means;

(b) all tender documentation is made available by electronic means from the
date of the publication of the notice of intended procurement; and

(c) the procuring entity accepts tenders by electronic means.

6. The application of paragraph 5, in conjunction with paragraph 4, shall in
no case result in a reduced time period for tendering established in accordance
with paragraph 3 of less than 10 days from the date on which the notice of
intended procurement is published.

7. If a procuring entity covered by Section B (Sub-Central Government
Entities) or C (Other Covered Entities) of Annexes 9-A (Coverage of
Government Procurement for the Union) and 9-B (Coverage of Government
Procurement for Viet Nam) has selected all or a limited number of qualified
suppliers, the time period for tendering may be fixed by mutual agreement
between the procuring entity and the selected suppliers. In the absence of
agreement, the period shall not be less than 10 days.

ARTICLE 9.13
Negotiations

1. With regard to covered procurement, a Party may provide for its
procuring entities to conduct negotiations:

EU/VN/en 148

(a) if the procuring entity has indicated its intent to conduct negotiations in
the notice of intended procurement required under paragraph 2 of Article
9.6 (Notices); or

(b) if it appears from the evaluation that no tender is obviously the most
advantageous in terms of the specific evaluation criteria set out in the
notice of intended procurement or tender documentation.

2. A procuring entity shall:

(a) ensure that any elimination of suppliers participating in negotiations is
carried out in accordance with the evaluation criteria set out in the notice
of intended procurement or tender documentation; and

(b) when negotiations are concluded, provide a common deadline for the
remaining participating suppliers to submit any new or revised tenders.

ARTICLE 9.14
Limited Tendering

1. Provided a procuring entity does not use limited tendering for the
purpose of avoiding competition among suppliers or in a manner that
discriminates against suppliers of the other Party or protects domestic
suppliers, a procuring entity may use limited tendering and may choose not to
apply Articles 9.6 (Notices), 9.7 (Conditions for Participation), 9.8
(Qualification of Suppliers), 9.10 (Market Consultations), 9.11 (Tender
Documentation), 9.12 (Time Periods), 9.13 (Negotiations) and 9.15
(Electronic Auctions) only under any of the following circumstances:

(a) if in response to a notice of intended procurement, or invitation to tender:
(1) no tenders were submitted or no suppliers requested participation;

(41) no tenders were submitted that conform to the essential
requirements of the tender documentation;

(111) no suppliers satisfied the conditions for participation; or

(iv) the tenders submitted have been collusive,

EU/VN/en 149

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)
(f)

provided that the procuring entity does not substantially modify the
essential requirements set out in the tender documentation;

if the goods or services can be supplied only by a particular supplier and
no reasonable alternative or substitute goods or services exist for any of
the following reasons:

(1) the requirement is for a work of art;
(ii) the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive rights; or
(111) an absence of competition for technical reasons;

for additional deliveries by the original supplier of goods or services that
were not included in the initial procurement, if a change of supplier for
such additional goods or services:

(i) cannot be made for economic or technical reasons such as
requirements of interchangeability or interoperability with existing
equipment, software, services or installations procured under the
initial procurement or conditions under original supplier warranties;
and

(ii) would cause significant inconvenience or substantial duplication of
costs for the procuring entity;

insofar as is strictly necessary if, for reasons of extreme urgency brought
about by events unforeseeable by the procuring entity, the goods or
services could not be obtained in time by means of an open tendering or
selective tendering;

for goods purchased on a commodity market or exchange;

when a procuring entity procures a prototype or a first good or service
that is developed at its request in the course of, and for, a particular
contract for research, experiment, study or original development; original
development of a prototype or a first good or service may include limited
production or supply in order to incorporate the results of field testing
and to demonstrate that the good or service 1s suitable for production or
supply in quantity to acceptable quality standards, but does not include
quantity production or supply to establish commercial viability or to

EU/VN/en 150

(g)

(h)

(i)

2.

recover research and development costs;

if additional construction services that were not included in the initial
contract but were within the objectives of the original tender
documentation have, due to unforeseeable circumstances, become
necessary to complete the construction services described therein;

for purchases made under exceptionally advantageous conditions that
only arise in the very short term in the case of unusual disposals such as
those arising from liquidation, receivership or bankruptcy, but not for
routine purchases from regular suppliers; or

when a contract is awarded to a winner of a design contest provided that:

(i) the contest has been organised in a manner that is consistent with
the principles of this Chapter, in particular relating to the publication
of a notice of intended procurement; and

(ii) the contest is judged by an independent jury with a view to a design
contract being awarded to a winner.

For each contract awarded in accordance with paragraph 1, a procuring

entity shall prepare a report in writing, or maintain a record. The report or
record shall include the name of the procuring entity, the value and kind of

goods or services procured and a statement indicating the circumstances and
conditions described in paragraph 1 that justified the use of limited tendering.

ARTICLE 9.15

Electronic Auctions

Where a procuring entity intends to conduct a covered procurement using an

electronic auction, the procuring entity shall provide each participant, before
commencing the electronic auction, with:

(a)

(b)

the automatic evaluation method that is based on the evaluation criteria
set out in the tender documentation and that will be used in the automatic
ranking or re-ranking during the auction; and

any other relevant information relating to the conduct of the auction.

EU/VN/en 151

ARTICLE 9.16
Treatment of Tenders and Awarding of Contracts
Treatment of Tenders

1. A procuring entity shall receive, open and treat all tenders under
procedures that guarantee the fairness and impartiality of the procurement
process, and the confidentiality of tenders.

2. Where a procuring entity provides a supplier with an opportunity to
correct unintentional errors of form between the opening of tenders and the
awarding of the contract, the procuring entity shall provide the same
opportunity to all participating suppliers.

Awarding of Contracts

3. To be considered for an award, a tender shall be submitted in writing and
shall, at the time of opening, comply with the essential requirements set out in
the notices and tender documentation and be submitted by a supplier that
satisfies the conditions for participation.

4. Unless a procuring entity determines that it is not in the public interest to
award a contract, it shall award the contract to the supplier that the procuring
entity has determined to be capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract and
that, based solely on the evaluation criteria specified in the notices and tender
documentation, has submitted:

(a) the most advantageous tender; or
(b) where price is the sole criterion, the lowest price.

5. Where a procuring entity receives a tender with a price that is abnormally
lower than the prices in other tenders submitted, it may verify with the
supplier that it satisfies the conditions for participation and is capable of
fulfilling the terms of the contract.

6. A procuring entity shall not use options, cancel a covered procurement or
modify awarded contracts in a manner that circumvents the obligations under
this Chapter.

EU/VN/en 152

ARTICLE 9.17
Post-Award Information
Information Provided to Suppliers

1. A procuring entity shall promptly inform suppliers that have submitted a
tender or application for participation of the procuring entity's contract award
decisions and, on the request of a supplier, shall do so in writing.

2. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 9.18 (Disclosure of Information),
a procuring entity shall, on request, provide an unsuccessful supplier with an
explanation of the reasons why the procuring entity did not select its tender
and, for suppliers meeting the conditions for participation whose tenders pass
technical specifications, the relative advantages of the successful supplier's
tender.

Publication of Award Information

3. Not later than 30 days after the award of each contract covered by this
Chapter, a procuring entity shall publish a notice in the appropriate paper or
electronic medium listed in Section H (Publication of Procurement
Information) of Annexes 9-A (Coverage of Government Procurement for the
Union) and 9-B (Coverage of Government Procurement for Viet Nam). Where
the procuring entity publishes the notice only in an electronic medium, the
information shall remain readily accessible for a reasonable period of time.
The notice shall include at least the following information:

(a) a description of the goods or services procured;
(b) the name and address of the procuring entity;
(c) the name and address of the successful supplier;

(d) the value of the successful tender or the highest and lowest offers taken
into account in the award of the contract;

(e) the date of award; and

(f) the type of procurement method used and, in cases where limited
tendering was used in accordance with Article 9.14 (Limited Tendering),
a brief description of the circumstances justifying the use of limited

EU/VN/en 153

tendering.
Maintenance of Records
4. Each procuring entity shall maintain:

(a) the documentation, records and reports relating to tendering procedures
and contract awards for covered procurement, including the records and
reports required under Article 9.14 (Limited Tendering), for a period of
at least three years from the date it awards a contract; and

(b) data that ensure the appropriate traceability of the conduct of covered
procurement by electronic means.

Statistics

5. The Parties shall endeavour to communicate the available statistical data
relevant to the procurement covered by this Chapter.

ARTICLE 9.18
Disclosure of Information
Provision of Information

1. On request of the other Party, a Party shall provide promptly any
information necessary to determine whether a procurement was conducted
fairly, impartially and in accordance with this Chapter, including, where
applicable, information on the characteristics and relative advantages of the
successful tender. The other Party shall not disclose it to any supplier, except
after consulting with, and obtaining the agreement of, the Party that provided
the information.

Non-Disclosure of Information

2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a Party, including
its procuring entities, shall not provide to any supplier information that could
prejudice legitimate commercial interests of another supplier or that might
prejudice fair competition between suppliers.

EU/VN/en 154

3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as requiring a Party, including
its procuring entities, authorities and review bodies, to disclose confidential
information where disclosure:

(a) would impede law enforcement;
(b) might prejudice fair competition between suppliers;

(c) would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular persons,
including the protection of intellectual property; or

(d) would otherwise be contrary to the public interest.

ARTICLE 9.19
Domestic Review

1. Each Party shall maintain, establish or designate at least one impartial
administrative or judicial authority that is independent of its procuring entities
to review, in a non-discriminatory, timely, transparent and effective manner, a
challenge by a supplier of:

(a) a breach of this Chapter; or

(b) a failure of a procuring entity to comply with a Party's measures
implementing this Chapter, where the supplier does not have a right to
challenge directly a breach of this Chapter under the domestic law of a
Party,

arising in the context of a covered procurement, in which the supplier has, or
has had, an interest. The procedural rules for all challenges shall be in writing
and made generally available.

2. In case of a complaint by a supplier, arising in the context of covered
procurement in which the supplier has, or has had, an interest, that there has
been a breach or a failure as referred to in paragraph 1, the Party of the
procuring entity conducting the procurement shall encourage, where
appropriate, the procuring entity and the supplier to seek resolution of the
complaint through consultations. The procuring entity shall accord impartial
and timely consideration to any such complaint in a manner that is not

EU/VN/en 155

prejudicial to the supplier's participation in ongoing or future procurement or
to its right to seek corrective measures under the administrative or judicial
review procedures. Each Party or its procuring entities shall make information
on such complaint mechanisms generally available.

3. Each supplier shall be allowed a sufficient period of time to prepare and
submit a challenge, which in no case shall be less than 10 days from the time
when the basis of the challenge became known or reasonably should have
become known to the supplier.

4. Where a body other than an authority referred to in paragraph 1 initially
reviews a challenge, the Party shall ensure that the supplier may lodge an
appeal against the initial decision with an impartial administrative or judicial
authority that is independent of the procuring entity whose procurement is the
subject of the challenge.

5. Each Party shall ensure that a review body that is not a court shall have
its decision subject to judicial review or have procedures that provide that:

(a) the procuring entity shall respond in writing to the challenge and disclose
all relevant documents to the review body;

(b) the participants in the proceedings (hereinafter referred to as
"participants") shall have the right to be heard prior to a decision of the
review body being made on the challenge;

(c) the participants shall have the right to be represented and accompanied;
(d) the participants shall have access to all proceedings; and

(e) the review body shall make its decisions on a supplier's challenge in a
timely manner, in writing, and shall include an explanation of the
grounds for each decision.

6. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that provide for:

(a) rapid interim measures, pending the resolution of a challenge, to preserve
the supplier's opportunity to participate in the procurement. Such interim
measures may result in suspension of the procurement process. The
procedures may provide that overriding adverse consequences for the
interests concerned, including the public interest, may be taken into

EU/VN/en 156

account when deciding whether such measures should be applied. Just
cause for not acting shall be provided in writing; and

(b) corrective action or compensation for the loss or damages suffered, when
a review body has determined that there has been a breach or a failure as
referred to in paragraph 1. The compensation for the damages suffered
may be limited to either the costs reasonably incurred in the preparation
of the tender or in bringing the challenge, or both.

ARTICLE 9.20
Modification and Rectification to Coverage

1. A Party shall notify the other Party in writing of any proposed
modification or rectification to its coverage (hereinafter referred to as
"modification".

2. For any proposed withdrawal of an entity from its coverage in exercise of
its rights on the grounds that government control or influence over it has been
effectively eliminated, the Party proposing the modification (hereinafter
referred to as "modifying Party") shall include in the notification evidence that
such government control or influence has been effectively eliminated.

3. Government control or influence over an entity is deemed to be
effectively eliminated when the modifying Party, including for the Union its
central government entities and its sub-central government entities, and for
Viet Nam its central government entities and sub-central government entities:

(a) does not own directly or indirectly more than 50 per cent of the entity's
subscribed capital or the votes attached to the shares issued by the entity;
and

(b) cannot appoint directly or indirectly more than half of the members of the
entity's board of directors or an equivalent body.

4. For any other proposed modification, the modifying Party shall include in
the notification information regarding the likely consequences of the change
for the mutually agreed coverage provided in this Agreement. Where the
modifying Party proposes to make rectifications of a purely formal nature and

EU/VN/en 157

minor modifications to its coverage not affecting covered procurement,
modifications of this kind shall be notified at least every two years.

Proposed modifications of coverage are deemed to constitute rectifications of
a purely formal nature and minor modifications to the Party's coverage in the
following cases:

(a) changes in the name of a procuring entity;

(b) merger of one or more procuring entities listed in Annex 9-A (Coverage
of Government Procurement for the Union) or 9-B (Coverage of
Government Procurement for Viet Nam); or

(c) the separation of a procuring entity listed in Annex 9-A (Coverage of
Government Procurement for the Union) or 9-B (Coverage of
Government Procurement for Viet Nam) into two or more entities that
are all added to the procuring entities listed in the same Section of the
Annex.

5. The modifying Party may include in its notice an offer of compensatory
adjustments for the change to its coverage, if necessary to maintain a level of
coverage comparable to that existing prior to the modification. The modifying
Party shall not be required to provide compensatory adjustments to the other
Party when a proposed modification concerns:

(a) a procuring entity over which it has effectively eliminated its control or
influence in respect of covered procurement by that entity; or

(b) rectifications of a purely formal nature and minor modifications to Annex
9-A (Coverage of Government Procurement for the Union) or 9-B
(Coverage of Government Procurement for Viet Nam).

Notwithstanding subparagraph (a), should the withdrawal by a modifying
Party of a significant number of procuring entities from its coverage on the
ground that these entities are no longer under government control or influence
in accordance with the criteria set out in paragraph 3 result in a significant
imbalance of coverages agreed between the Parties, the modifying Party shall
accept to enter into consultations with the other Party to discuss, without
prejudice, the modalities for redressing such imbalance.

6. The other Party shall notify the modifying Party of any objection to the

EU/VN/en 158

proposed modification within 45 days of the notification.

7. If the other Party notifies an objection, both Parties shall seek to resolve
the issue through consultations. During the consultations, the objecting Party
may request further information with a view to clarifying the proposed
modification, including the nature of any government control or influence.

8. If the consultations under paragraph 7 do not resolve the issue, the Parties
may use the dispute settlement mechanism provided for in Chapter 15
(Dispute Settlement).

9. A proposed modification shall become effective only if:

(a) the other Party has not submitted to the modifying Party a written
objection to the proposed modification within 45 days from the date of
the notification of the proposed modifications;

(b) the Parties have reached an agreement; or

(c) an arbitration panel has issued a final report in accordance with Article
15.11 (Final Report) concluding that the Parties shall give effect to the
proposed modification.

ARTICLE 9.21
Cooperation

1. The Parties recognise their shared interest in cooperating in the
promotion of international liberalisation of government procurement markets
with a view to achieving enhanced understanding of their respective
government procurement systems and to improving access to their respective
markets.

2. Without prejudice to paragraph 4 of Article 9.6 (Notices), the Parties
shall endeavour to cooperate in matters such as:

(a) exchanging experiences and information, such as regulatory frameworks
and best practices;

(b) developing and expanding the use of electronic means in government

EU/VN/en 159

procurement systems;

(c) building capability of government officials in best government
procurement practices; and

(d) institutional strengthening for the fulfilment of the provisions of this
Chapter.

ARTICLE 9.22
Future Negotiations
Procurement by Electronic Means

1. The Parties shall review the provisions of Article 9.15 (Electronic
Auctions) once Viet Nam's electronic procurement system has been fully
developed to take into account possible technological changes and in
particular to consider other aspects such as the mathematical formula used for
the automatic evaluation method and the possible communication of the
results of any initial evaluation to the participants in the auction.

2. The Parties shall conduct further negotiations on the duration of the
period for the storage of data relating to procurement by electronic means
once Viet Nam's electronic procurement system is operational.

Market Access

3. The Parties shall conduct further negotiations on the coverage of
additional sub-central government entities no later than 15 years after the date
of the entry into force of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 9.23

Committee on Investment, Services, Electronic Commerce and
Government Procurement

The Committee on Investment, Services, Electronic Commerce and
Government Procurement established pursuant to Article 17.2 (Specialised

EU/VN/en 160

Committees) shall be responsible for the implementation of this Chapter. It
may, in particular:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

discuss the exchange of statistical data in accordance with paragraph 5 of
Article 9.17 (Post-Award Information);

review pending notifications of modifications to coverage and approve
the revised list of procuring entities in Sections A (Central Government
Entities) to C (Other Covered Entities) of Annexes 9-A (Coverage of
Government Procurement for the Union) and 9-B (Coverage of
Government Procurement for Viet Nam);

approve the compensatory adjustments resulting from modifications
affecting coverage;

consider issues regarding government procurement that are referred to it
by a Party; and

discuss any other matters related to the operation of this Chapter.

CHAPTER 10

COMPETITION POLICY

SECTION A

ANTI-COMPETITIVE CONDUCT

ARTICLE 10.1

Principles

The Parties recognise the importance of undistorted competition in their trade
and investment relations. The Parties acknowledge that anti-competitive
conduct has the potential to distort the proper functioning of markets and
undermine the benefits of trade liberalisation.

EU/VN/en 161

ARTICLE 10.2
Legislative Framework

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain comprehensive legislation on
competition that proscribes anti-competitive conduct, with the objective of
promoting economic efficiency and consumer welfare, and shall take
appropriate action with respect to such conduct.

2. The competition law of the Parties shall, in their respective territories,
effectively address:

(a) agreements between enterprises, decisions by associations of enterprises
and concerted practices which have as their object or effect the
prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;

(b) abuses by one or more enterprises of a dominant position, and
concentrations between enterprises which would significantly impede
effective competition.

ARTICLE 10.3
Implementation

1. Each Party shall maintain its autonomy in developing and enforcing its
competition law.

2. Each Party shall maintain authorities which are responsible for the full
application and the effective enforcement of its competition law and ensure
that they are appropriately equipped and have the powers necessary for
fulfilling their responsibilities.

3. All enterprises, private or public, shall be subject to the competition law
referred to in Article 10.2 (Legislative Framework).

4. Each Party shall apply its competition law in a transparent and non-
discriminatory manner, including to private and public enterprises, respecting
the principles of procedural fairness and rights of defence of the enterprises
concerned.

EU/VN/en 162

5. The application of competition law shall not obstruct the performance, in
law or in fact, of the particular tasks of public interest assigned to the
enterprises in question. Exemptions from the competition law of a Party shall
be limited to tasks of public interest, proportionate to the desired public policy
objective and transparent.

SECTION B

SUBSIDIES

ARTICLE 10.4
Principles

1. The Parties agree that a Party may grant subsidies when they are
necessary to achieve a public policy objective. The Parties acknowledge that
certain subsidies have the potential to distort the proper functioning of markets
and undermine the benefits of trade liberalisation. In principle, a Party should
not grant subsidies to enterprises providing goods or services if they
negatively affect, or are likely to negatively affect, competition and trade.

2. An illustrative list of public policy objectives for which a Party may grant
subsidies, subject to the conditions set out in this Section, includes the
following:

(a) making good the damage caused by natural disasters or exceptional
occurrences;

(b) promoting the economic development of areas where the standard of
living is abnormally low or where there is serious underemployment;

(c) remedying a serious disturbance in the economy of one of the Parties;

(d) facilitating the development of certain economic activities or of certain
economic areas, including but not limited to, subsidies for clearly defined
research, development and innovation purposes, subsidies for training or
for the creation of employment, subsidies for environmental purposes,
subsidies in favour of small and medium-sized enterprises as defined in

EU/VN/en 163

the Parties' respective legislations; and
(e) promoting culture and heritage conservation.

3. Each Party shall ensure that enterprises use the specific subsidies
provided by a Party only for the policy objective for which the specific
subsidies have been granted.!

ARTICLE 10.5
Definition and Scope

1. For the purposes of this Section, a "subsidy" means a measure which
fulfils the conditions set out in Article 1.1 of the SCM Agreement irrespective
of whether it is granted to an enterprise manufacturing goods or supplying
services.

2. This Section applies only to subsidies which are specific in accordance
with Article 2 of the SCM Agreement. Subsidies to individual consumers or
general measures, including subsidies or measures intended to achieve social
policy objectives, are not considered as specific.

3. This Section applies to specific subsidies to all enterprises, including
public and private enterprises.

4. The application of this Section shall not obstruct the performance, in law
or in fact, of the particular tasks of public interest, including public service
obligations, assigned to the enterprises concerned. Exemptions should be
limited to tasks of public interest, proportionate to the public policy objectives
assigned to those enterprises, and transparent.

5. This Section does not apply to non-economic activities.

6. Paragraph 1 of Article 10.9 (Specific Subsidies Subject to Conditions)

For greater certainty, when a Party has set up the relevant legislative framework and
administrative procedures to this effect, the obligation is considered to be fulfilled.

This Article does not prejudice the Parties' positions and the possible outcome of future
discussions in the WTO on subsidies to services. Depending on the progress of those
discussions at the WTO level, the Parties may adopt a decision by a relevant committee to
update this Agreement in this respect.

EU/VN/en 164

does not apply to fisheries subsidies and subsidies related to trade in goods
covered by Annex | to the Agreement on Agriculture.

7. This Section applies only to specific subsidies of which the amount per
beneficiary over a period of three years is above 300 000 special drawing
rights.!

8. With regard to subsidies to enterprises supplying services, Article 10.7
(Transparency) and Article 10.9 (Specific Subsidies Subject to Conditions)
apply only to the following services sectors: telecommunications, banking,
insurance, transport including maritime transport, energy, computer services,
architecture and engineering, and construction and environmental services,
subject to the reservations provided for in Chapter 8 (Liberalisation of
Investment, Trade in Services and Electronic Commerce).

9. This Section does not apply to sectors or sub-sectors which the Parties
have not listed in Chapter 8 (Liberalisation of Investment, Trade in Services
and Electronic Commerce).

10. Article 10.9 (Specific Subsidies Subject to Conditions) does not apply to
subsidies formally agreed or granted before or within five years after the entry
into force of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 10.6
Relationship with the WTO

This Section applies without prejudice to the rights and obligations of each
Party under Article VI of GATT 1994, the SCM Agreement and the
Agreement on Agriculture.

ARTICLE 10.7
Transparency
1. Each Party shall ensure transparency in the area of specific subsidies. To

For greater certainty, the notification obligation does not require the notifying Party to

EU/VN/en 165

that end, each Party shall notify the other Party every four years of the legal
basis, form, amount or budget, and if possible, the recipient of a specific
subsidy.!

2. The notification obligation referred to in paragraph | is deemed to have
been fulfilled if the Party makes the relevant information available on a
publicly accessible website, as from 31 December of the calendar year which
follows the year when the subsidy was granted. The first notification shall be
made available no later than four years after the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.

ARTICLE 10.8
Consultations

1. If a Party considers that a specific subsidy granted by the other Party,
which is not covered by Article 10.9 (Specific Subsidies Subject to
Conditions), negatively affects or may negatively affect its trade or investment
interests, that Party may express its concern in written form to the other Party
and request consultations on the matter. The requested Party shall accord
sympathetic consideration to this request. The consultations should, in
particular, aim at identifying whether:

(a) the specific subsidy was only granted to achieve a public policy
objective;

(b) the amount of the subsidy in question is limited to the minimum needed
to achieve this objective;

(c) the subsidy creates an incentive; and

(d) the negative effect on trade and investment of the requesting Party is
limited.

2. In order to facilitate the consultations, the requested Party shall provide
information on the specific subsidy in question within 90 days of the date of

provide the name of the beneficiary of the subsidy.
For greater certainty, the notification obligation does not require the notifying Party to
provide the name of the beneficiary of the subsidy.

EU/VN/en 166

receipt of the request. If the requesting Party, after receiving information on
the subsidy in question, considers that the subsidy concerned by the
consultations negatively affects or may negatively affect in a disproportionate
manner its trade or investment interests, the requested Party shall use its best
endeavours to eliminate or minimise these negative effects caused by the
subsidy in question.

ARTICLE 10.9
Specific Subsidies Subject to Conditions
1. The Parties shall apply conditions to the following specific subsidies:

(a) a legal arrangement whereby a government or any public body is
responsible for covering debts or liabilities of certain enterprises is
allowed, provided that the coverage of the debts and liabilities is limited
as regards the amount of those debts and liabilities or the duration of that
responsibility;

(b) support to insolvent or ailing enterprises in various forms, such as loans
and guarantees, cash grants, capital injections, provision of assets below
market prices, and tax exemptions, with a duration of more than one year
is allowed provided that a credible restructuring plan has been prepared,
which is based on realistic assumptions with a view to ensuring the return
of the enterprise to long-term viability within a reasonable time and with
the enterprise itself contributing to the costs of restructuring.!

2. Paragraph 1 does not apply to specific subsidies for which the Party
granting the subsidy has demonstrated, upon a written request of the other
Party, that the subsidy in question does neither affect nor is likely to affect
trade or investment of the other Party.

3. Paragraph 1 does not apply to specific subsidies that are granted to
remedy a serious disturbance in the economy of a Party. A disturbance in the
economy of a Party shall be considered serious if it is exceptional, temporary

1 This does not prevent the Parties from providing temporary liquidity support in the form of

loan guarantees or loans limited to the amount needed to keep the enterprise in business for
the time necessary to work out a restructuring or liquidation plan.

EU/VN/en 167

and significant and affects the Member States or the whole economy of a Party
rather than a specific region or economic sector.

ARTICLE 10.10
Review

The Parties shall review this Section no later than five years after the entry
into force of this Agreement and at regular intervals thereafter. The Parties
shall consult each other on the need to modify this Section in light of the
experience gained and the development of any corresponding rules in the
WTO. The Parties shall, in particular, review the inclusion of additional
services sectors under the scope of this Section in Article 10.5 (Definition and

Scope).
SECTION C
DEFINITIONS AND COMMON PRINCIPLES
ARTICLE 10.11
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) "public policy objective" means the general goal to deliver an outcome in
the overall public benefit; and

(b) "tasks of public interest" means specific activities which deliver
outcomes in the overall public benefit that would not be supplied or
would be supplied under different conditions in terms of accessibility,
quality, safety, affordability or equal treatment by the market without
public intervention.

EU/VN/en 168

ARTICLE 10.12
Confidentiality

1. When exchanging information under this Chapter, the Parties shall take
into account the limitations imposed by their respective legislation concerning
professional and business secrecy and shall ensure the protection of business
secrets and other confidential information.

2. Any information communicated under this Agreement shall be treated by
the receiving Party as confidential unless the other Party has authorised the
disclosure or made that information available to the general public.

ARTICLE 10.13
Dispute Settlement

No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under this Agreement for
any matter arising under Section A (Anti-Competitive Conduct) of this
Chapter and Article 10.8 (Consultations).

ARTICLE 10.14
Cooperation

In order to fulfil the objectives of this Chapter and to enhance effective
competition enforcement, the Parties acknowledge that it is in their common
interest to strengthen cooperation with regard to competition policy
development, including subsidy control, subject to the availability of funding
under the Parties' cooperation instruments and programmes.

EU/VN/en 169

CHAPTER 11

STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES,

ENTERPRISES GRANTED SPECIAL RIGHTS OR PRIVILEGES,

AND DESIGNATED MONOPOLIES

ARTICLE 11.1

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

"commercial activities" means activities the end result of which is the
production of a good or supply of a service, which will be sold in the
relevant market in quantities and at prices determined by the enterprise,
and are undertaken with an orientation towards profit-making;'

"commercial considerations" means price, quality, availability,
marketability, transportation and other terms and conditions of purchase
or sale, or other factors that would normally be taken into account in the
commercial decisions of an enterprise operating according to market
economy principles in the relevant business or industry;

"designate" means to establish or authorise a monopoly, or to expand the
scope of a monopoly to cover an additional good or service;

"designated monopoly" means an entity, including a group of entities or a
government agency, and any subsidiary thereof, that in a relevant market
in the territory of a Party is designated as the sole supplier or purchaser of
a good or service, but does not include an entity that has been granted an
exclusive intellectual property right solely by reason of such grant;

"enterprise granted special rights or privileges" means any enterprise,
including any subsidiary, public or private, that has been granted by a
Party, in law or in fact, special rights or privileges;

"special rights or privileges" means rights or privileges granted by a Party

For greater certainty, activities undertaken by an enterprise which operates on a non-profit
basis or on a cost-recovery basis are not activities undertaken with an orientation toward

EU/VN/en 170

to a limited number of enterprises, or any subsidiaries thereof, within a
given geographical area or product market, the effect of which is to
substantially limit the ability of any other enterprise to carry out its
activity in the same geographical area or product market in like
circumstances; the granting of a license or a permit to a limited number
of enterprises in allocating a scarce resource through objective,
proportional and non-discriminatory criteria is not in and of itself a
special right or privilege; and

(g) "state-owned enterprise" means an enterprise, including any subsidiary,
in which a Party, directly or indirectly:

(1) owns more than 50 per cent of the enterprise's subscribed capital or
controls more than 50 per cent of the votes attached to the shares
issued by the enterprise;

(ii) can appoint more than half of the members of the enterprise's board
of directors or an equivalent body; or

(111) can exercise control over the strategic decisions of the enterprise.

ARTICLE 11.2
Scope of Application

1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under paragraphs 1 to 3 of
Article XVII of GATT 1994 and the Understanding on the Interpretation of
Article XVII of the General Agreement On Tariffs And Trade 1994 as well as
under paragraphs 1, 2 and 5 of Article VIII of GATS which are hereby
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. This Chapter applies to all state-owned enterprises, enterprises granted
special rights or privileges, and designated monopolies, engaged in a
commercial activity. If an enterprise combines commercial and non-
commercial activities!, only the commercial activities of that enterprise are
covered by this Chapter.

profit-making.
This includes carrying out a public service obligation.

EU/VN/en 171

3. This Chapter does not apply to state-owned enterprises, enterprises
granted special rights or privileges, and designated monopolies, for which a
Party has taken measures on a temporary basis in response to a national or
global economic emergency.

4. This Chapter does not apply to state-owned enterprises, enterprises
granted special rights or privileges, and designated monopolies if in any one of
the three previous consecutive years the annual revenue derived from the
commercial activities of that enterprise or that monopoly was less than 200
million special drawing rights.! This threshold applies to state-owned
enterprises, enterprises granted special rights or privileges, and designated
monopolies, at sub-central levels of government, as from five years after the
date of entry into force of this Agreement.

5. This Chapter does not apply to covered procurement by a Party or its
procuring entities within the meaning of Article 9.2 (Scope and Coverage).

6. This Chapter does not apply to state-owned enterprises, enterprises
granted special rights or privileges, and designated monopolies, owned or
controlled by a governmental authority of a Party in charge of national
defence, public order or public security, except if these are engaged
exclusively in commercial activities unrelated to national defence, public
order or public security.

7. This Chapter does not apply to any service supplied by state-owned
enterprises, enterprises granted special rights or privileges, and designated
monopolies, in the exercise of governmental authority.

8. This Chapter does not apply to measures or activities listed in Annex 11
(Specific Rules for Viet Nam on State-Owned Enterprises, Enterprises
Granted Special Rights or Privileges, and Designated Monopolies).

The calculation of the revenue shall include the relevant revenue of all state-owned
enterprises, enterprises granted special rights or privileges and designated monopolies,
including the revenue of the subsidiaries engaged in commercial activities on the same or
related markets.

The term "a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority" has the same
meaning as defined in subparagraph 3(c) of Article I of GATS.

EU/VN/en 172

ARTICLE 11.3
General Provisions

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the laws and regulations of a Party
governing its systems of state ownership.

2. Without prejudice to the Parties' rights and obligations under this
Chapter, nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from establishing or
maintaining state-owned enterprises, from granting enterprises special rights
or privileges, or from designating or maintaining monopolies.

3. A Party shall not require or encourage its state-owned enterprises,
enterprises granted special rights or privileges, and designated monopolies to
act in a manner inconsistent with this Chapter.

ARTICLE 11.4
Non-Discrimination and Commercial Considerations

1. Each Party shall ensure that its state-owned enterprises, enterprises
granted special rights or privileges, and designated monopolies, when
engaging in commercial activities:

(a) act in accordance with commercial considerations in their purchases or
sales of goods or services, except to fulfil the terms of their public
mandate that are not inconsistent with subparagraph 1(b);

(b) in their purchase of a good or service:

(i) accord to a good or service supplied by an enterprise of the other
Party treatment no less favourable than they accord to a like good or
a like service supplied by enterprises of the Party; and

(11) accord to a good or service supplied by an enterprise of investors of
the other Party in the Party's territory treatment no less favourable
than they accord to a like good or a like service supplied by
enterprises of investors of the other Party in the relevant market in
the Party's territory;

EU/VN/en 173

(c) in their sale of a good or service:

(i) accord to an enterprise of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than they accord to enterprises of the Party; and

(11) accord to an enterprise of investors of the other Party in the Party's
territory treatment no less favourable than they accord to enterprises
of investors of the other Party in the relevant market in the Party's
territory.

2. Paragraph 1 does not preclude state-owned enterprises, enterprises
granted special rights or privileges or designated monopolies from:

(a) purchasing or supplying goods or services on different terms or
conditions, including those relating to price, or

(b) refusing to purchase or supply goods or services,

provided that such different terms or conditions or refusal 1s undertaken in
accordance with commercial considerations.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to the sectors referred to in Article 8.3
(Scope) and Article 8.9 (Scope).

4. Paragraphs | and 2 apply to commercial activities of state-owned
enterprises, enterprises granted special rights or privileges, and designated
monopolies, if the same activity would affect trade in services and investment
with respect to which a Party has undertaken a commitment under Articles 8.5
(National Treatment), 8.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), 8.11 (National
Treatment), subject to the conditions or qualifications set out in its Schedule of
Specific Commitments in Annex 8-A (The Union's Schedule of Specific
Commitments) or 8-B (Viet Nam's Schedule of Specific Commitments),
respectively, pursuant to Articles 8.7 (Schedule of Specific Commitments) and
8.12 (Schedule of Specific Commitments). For greater certainty, in the event
of a conflict between paragraph 4 of Article 11.2 (Scope of Application) and
the conditions or qualifications set out in a Party's Schedule of Specific
Commitments pursuant to Articles 8.7 (Schedule of Specific Commitments)
and 8.12 (Schedule of Specific Commitments), those schedules shall prevail.

EU/VN/en 174

ARTICLE 11.5
Regulatory Framework

1. The Parties shall endeavour to ensure that state-owned enterprises,
enterprises granted special rights or privileges, and designated monopolies
observe internationally recognised standards of corporate governance.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its regulatory bodies or functions are not
accountable to any enterprises or entities that they regulate in order to ensure
the effectiveness of the regulatory bodies or functions, and act impartially! in
like circumstances with respect to all enterprises or entities that they regulate,
including state-owned enterprises, enterprises granted special rights or
privileges, and designated monopolies.

3. Each Party shall ensure the enforcement of laws and regulations in a
consistent and non-discriminatory manner, including with regard to state-
owned enterprises, enterprises granted special rights or privileges, and
designated monopolies.

ARTICLE 11.6
Transparency

1. A Party which has reasonable reason to believe that its interests under
this Chapter are being adversely affected by the commercial activities of a
state-owned enterprise, an enterprise granted special rights or privileges, or a
designated monopoly, of the other Party may request the other Party in writing
to provide information about the operations of that enterprise or monopoly.
The request shall indicate the enterprise or monopoly, the products or services
and markets concerned, and include indications that the enterprise or
monopoly is engaging in practices that hinder trade or investment between the
Parties.

For greater certainty, the impartiality with which the regulatory body exercises its regulatory
functions is to be assessed by reference to a general pattern or practice of that regulatory
body.

For greater certainty, for those sectors in which the Parties have agreed to specific obligations
relating to the regulatory body in other Chapters, the relevant provision in the other Chapters
shall prevail.

EU/VN/en 175

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)
(f)

3.

The information referred to in paragraph | shall include:

the ownership and the voting structure of the enterprise or monopoly,
indicating the percentage of shares and the percentage of voting rights
that a Party or a state-owned enterprise, an enterprise granted special
rights or privileges, or a designated monopoly cumulatively own;

a description of any special shares or special voting or other rights that a
Party or a state-owned enterprise, an enterprise granted special rights or
privileges, or a designated monopoly hold, where such rights differ from
the rights attached to the common shares of such enterprise or monopoly;

the organisational structure of the enterprise or monopoly, the
composition of its board of directors or of an equivalent body exercising
direct or indirect control in such an enterprise or entity, and cross-
holdings and other links with different state-owned enterprises,
enterprises granted special rights or privileges, or designated monopolies;

a description of which government departments or public bodies regulate
or monitor the enterprise or monopoly, a description of the reporting
lines', and the rights and practices of the government department or
public bodies in the appointment, dismissal or remuneration of managers;

annual revenue or total assets, or both;

exemptions, immunities and any other measures, including more
favourable treatment, applicable in the territory of the requested Party to
any state-owned enterprise, enterprise granted special rights or privileges,
or designated monopoly.

A Party may request the other Party to provide additional information

regarding the calculations of the revenue threshold referred to in paragraph 4
of Article 11.2 (Scope of Application).

4.

Paragraphs 1 to 3 shall not require a Party to disclose confidential

information which would be inconsistent with its laws and regulations, impede

law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or prejudice
the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises.

1

For greater certainty, a Party is not obliged to disclose reports or the contents of any reports.

EU/VN/en 176

5. In the case of the Union, subparagraphs 2(a) to 2(e) do not apply to
enterprises which qualify as small or medium-sized enterprises as defined in
Union law.

ARTICLE 11.7
Technical Cooperation

Recognising the importance of promoting effective legal and regulatory
frameworks for state-owned enterprises, the Parties shall engage in mutually
agreed technical cooperation activities with a view to promoting efficiency
and transparency of state-owned enterprises, subject to the availability of
funding under the Party's cooperation instruments and programmes.

CHAPTER 12

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

SECTION A

GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PRINCIPLES

ARTICLE 12.1
Objectives
1. The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) facilitate the creation, production and commercialisation of innovative
and creative products between the Parties, contributing to a more
sustainable and inclusive economy in each Party; and

(b) achieve an adequate and effective level of protection and enforcement of
intellectual property rights.

EU/VN/en 177

2. The protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights should
contribute to the promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer and
dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users
of technological knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic
welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations.

ARTICLE 12.2
Nature and Scope of Obligations

1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the international
treaties dealing with intellectual property to which they are party, including
the TRIPS Agreement. The Parties shall ensure an adequate and effective
implementation of those treaties. This Chapter shall complement and further
specify those rights and obligations between the Parties with an aim at
ensuring adequate and effective implementation of those treaties, as well as
the balance between the rights of intellectual property holders and the interest
of the public.

2. For the purposes of this Agreement, intellectual property refers at least to
all categories of intellectual property that are referred to in Sections | to 7 of
Part II of the TRIPS Agreement, namely:

(a) copyright and related rights;

(b) trademarks;

(c) geographical indications;

(d) industrial designs;

(e) patent rights;

(f) layout-designs (topographies) of integrated circuits;
(g) protection of undisclosed information; and

(h) plant varieties.

3. The protection of intellectual property includes protection against unfair

EU/VN/en 178

competition as referred to in Article 10bis of the Paris Convention for the
Protection of Industrial Property of 20 March 1883, as last revised at
Stockholm on 14 July 1967 (hereinafter referred to as "the Paris Convention").

ARTICLE 12.3
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

With regard to the protection of intellectual property, any advantage, favour,
privilege or immunity granted by a Party to the nationals of any third country
shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the nationals of the
other Party, subject to the exceptions provided for in Articles 4 and 5 of the
TRIPS Agreement.

ARTICLE 12.4
Exhaustion

Each Party shall be free to establish its own regime for the exhaustion of
intellectual property rights subject to the relevant provisions of the TRIPS
Agreement.

EU/VN/en 179

SECTION B

STANDARDS CONCERNING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

I.

SUB-SECTION 1

COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS

ARTICLE 12.5
Protection Granted

The Parties shall comply with the rights and obligations set out in the

following international treaties:

(a)

(b)

(c)
2.

the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works of
9 September 1886, as last revised at Paris on 24 July 1971 (hereinafter
referred to as "the Berne Convention");

the International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers
of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations, done at Rome on 26
October 1961; and

the TRIPS Agreement.

The Parties shall accede to the following international treaties within

three years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement:

(a)

(b)

the WIPO Copyright Treaty, adopted in Geneva on 20 December 1996;
and

the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty, adopted in Geneva on
20 December 1996.

EU/VN/en 180

ARTICLE 12.6

Authors

Each Party shall provide for authors to have the exclusive right to authorise or
prohibit:

(a)

(b)

(c)

direct or indirect reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole or
in part, of their works;

any form of distribution to the public, by sale or other transfer of
ownership, of the original of their works or of copies thereof; and

any communication to the public of their works, by wire or wireless
means, including the making available to the public of their works in
such a way that members of the public may access them from a place and
at a time individually chosen by them.

ARTICLE 12.7

Performers

Each Party shall provide for performers to have the exclusive right to
authorise or prohibit:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

the fixation of their performances;

direct or indirect reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole or
in part, of fixations of their performances;

distribution to the public, by sale or other transfer of ownership, of the
fixations of their performances;

the making available to the public, by wire or wireless means, of
fixations of their performances in such a way that members of the public
may access them from a place and at a time individually chosen by them;
and

the broadcasting by wireless means and the communication to the public
of their unfixed performances, except where the performance is itself

EU/VN/en 181

already a broadcast performance.

ARTICLE 12.8
Producers of Phonograms

Each Party shall provide for phonogram producers to have the exclusive right
to authorise or prohibit:

(a) direct or indirect reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole or
in part, of their phonograms;

(b) distribution to the public, by sale or other transfer of ownership, of their
phonograms, including copies thereof; and

(c) the making available to the public, by wire or wireless means, of their
phonograms in such a way that members of the public may access them
from a place and at a time individually chosen by them.

ARTICLE 12.9
Broadcasting Organisations

Each Party shall provide broadcasting organisations with the exclusive right to
authorise or prohibit:

(a) the fixation of their broadcasts;
(b) the reproduction of fixations of their broadcasts;
(c) the distribution to the public of fixations of their broadcasts; and

(d) the rebroadcasting of their broadcasts by wireless means.

EU/VN/en 182

ARTICLE 12.10
Broadcasting and Communication to the Public

Each Party shall provide to performers and producers of phonograms a right in
order to ensure that a single equitable remuneration is paid by the user to
them, if a phonogram published for commercial purposes or a reproduction of
such phonogram is used for broadcasting by wireless means or for any
communication to the public. Each Party shall ensure that this remuneration is
shared between the relevant performers and phonogram producers. Each Party
may, in the absence of agreement between the performers and phonogram
producers, lay down the conditions as to the sharing of this remuneration
between them.

ARTICLE 12.11
Term of Protection

1. The rights of an author of a literary or artistic work within the meaning of
Article 2 of the Berne Convention shall run for the life of the author and for
not less than 50 years after his death, irrespective of the date when the work is
lawfully made available to the public.

2. in the case of a work of joint authorship, the term referred to in paragraph
1 shall be calculated from the death of the last surviving author.

3. The rights of performers shall expire not less than 50 years after the date
of the performance. If a fixation of the performance is lawfully published or
lawfully communicated to the public within that period, those rights shall
expire not less than 50 years from the date of the first lawful publication or the
first lawful communication to the public, whichever is earlier.

4. The rights of producers of phonograms shall expire not less than 50 years
after the fixation is made. If the phonogram has been lawfully published
within this period, those rights shall expire not less than 50 years from the date
of the first lawful publication. If no lawful publication has taken place within
the period referred to in the first sentence, and if the phonogram has been
lawfully communicated to the public within that period, those rights shall
expire not less than 50 years from the date of the first lawful communication

EU/VN/en 183

to the public.

5. The rights of broadcasting organisations shall expire not less than 50
years after the first transmission of a broadcast, whether that broadcast is
transmitted by wire or over the air, including by cable or satellite.

6. The terms laid down in this Article shall be calculated from 1 January of
the year following the event which gives rise to them.

ARTICLE 12.12
Protection of Technological Measures

1. Each Party shall provide adequate legal protection against the
circumvention of any effective technological measures, which are used by the
right holder of any copyright or related right which the person concerned
carries out in the knowledge, or with reasonable grounds to know, that he or
she is pursuing that objective.

2. Each Party shall provide adequate legal protection against the
manufacture, import, distribution, sale, rental, offer to public for sale or rental,
or possession for commercial purposes of devices, products or components or
the provision of services, which:

(a) are promoted, advertised or marketed for the purpose of circumvention of
any effective technological measures;

(b) have only a limited commercially significant purpose or use other than to
circumvent any effective technological measures; or

(c) are primarily designed, produced, adapted or performed for the purpose
of enabling or facilitating the circumvention of any _ effective
technological measures.

3. In providing adequate legal protection pursuant to paragraphs | and 2, a
Party may adopt or maintain appropriate limitations or exceptions to measures
implementing those paragraphs. The obligations under paragraphs | and 2 are
without prejudice to the rights, limitations, exceptions, or defences to
infringements of copyright or related rights under each Party's domestic law.

EU/VN/en 184

4. For the purposes of this Article, the term "technological measures" means
any technology, device or component that, in the normal course of its
operation, is designed to prevent or restrict acts, in respect of works or other
subject-matter, which are not authorised by the right holder of any copyright
or related right as provided for by domestic legislation. Technological
measures shall be deemed "effective" where the use of a protected work or
other subject-matter 1s controlled by the right holders through application of
an access control or protection process, such as encryption, scrambling or
other transformation of the work or other subject-matter or a copy control
mechanism, which achieves the objective of protection.

ARTICLE 12.13
Protection of Rights Management Information

1. Each Party shall provide adequate legal protection against any person
knowingly performing, without authority, any of the following acts:

(a) the removal or alteration of any electronic rights management
information; or

(b) the distribution, importation for distribution, broadcasting,
communication or making available to the public of works,
performances, phonograms or other subject-matter protected under this
Sub-Section from which electronic rights management information has
been removed or altered without authority,

if this person knows, or has reasonable grounds to know, that by so doing this
person is inducing, enabling, facilitating or concealing an infringement of any
copyright or any related right as provided for by domestic legislation.

2. For the purposes of this Article, the term "rights management
information" means any information provided by right holders which
identifies the work or other subject-matter referred to in this Sub-Section, the
author or any other right holder, information about the terms and conditions of
use of the work or other subject-matter, or any numbers or codes that represent
such information.

3. Paragraph 2 applies when any of the items of information referred to in

EU/VN/en 185

that paragraph is associated with a copy of, or appears in connection with the
communication to the public of, a work or other subject-matter referred to in
this Sub-Section.

ARTICLE 12.14
Exceptions and Limitations

1. Each Party may provide for exceptions and limitations to the rights set
out in Articles 12.6 (Authors) to 12.10 (Broadcasting and Communication to
the Public) only in certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the subject-matter and do not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the right holders in accordance with the international
treaties to which they are party.

2. Each Party shall provide that acts of reproduction referred to in
Articles 12.6 (Authors) to 12.10 (Broadcasting and Communication to the
Public), which are transient or incidental, which are an integral and essential
part of a technological process and the sole purpose of which is to enable:

(a) a transmission in a network between third parties by an intermediary; or
(b) a lawful use,

of a work or other subject-matter to be made, and which have no independent
economic significance, shall be exempted from the reproduction right
provided for in Articles 12.6 (Authors) to 12.10 (Broadcasting and
Communication to the Public).

ARTICLE 12.15
Artists' Resale Right in Works of Art

1. A Party may provide, for the benefit of the author of an original work of
art, a resale right, to be defined as an inalienable right, to receive a royalty
based on the sale price obtained for any resale of the work subsequent to the
first transfer of the work by the author.

EU/VN/en 186

2. The right referred to in paragraph | applies to all acts of resale involving
as sellers, buyers or intermediaries art market professionals, such as
salesrooms, art galleries and, in general, any professional dealers in works of
art.

3. A Party may provide that the right referred to in paragraph 1 does not
apply to acts of resale where the seller has acquired the work directly from the
author less than three years before that resale and where the resale price does
not exceed a certain minimum amount.

4. The right referred to in paragraph 1 may be claimed in a Party only if the
domestic legislation of that Party to which the author belongs so permits, and
to the extent permitted by the Party where this right is claimed. The procedure
for collection and the amounts shall be determined in domestic legislation.

ARTICLE 12.16
Cooperation on Collective Management of Rights

The Parties shall endeavour to promote dialogue and cooperation between
their respective collective management organisations for the purposes of
promoting the availability of works and other protected subject-matter in the
territories of the Parties and the transfer of royalties for the use of such works
or other protected subject-matter.

SUB-SECTION 2

TRADEMARKS

ARTICLE 12.17
International Treaties

1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the Protocol
Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration
of Marks, adopted at Madrid on 27 June 1989, as last amended on 12

EU/VN/en 187

November 2007.

2. Each Party shall use the classification provided for in the Nice Agreement
Concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the
Purposes of the Registration of Marks, done at Nice on 15 June 1957, as
amended on 28 September 1979 (hereinafter referred to as "Nice
Classification").!

3. Each Party shall simplify and develop its trademark registration
procedures using, inter alia, the Trademark Law Treaty, adopted at Geneva on
27 October 1994, and the Singapore Treaty on the Law of Trademarks, done at
Singapore on 27 March 2006, as reference points.

ARTICLE 12.18
Rights Conferred by a Trademark

A registered trademark shall confer on the proprietor exclusive rights therein.
The proprietor shall be entitled to prevent all third parties not having his
consent from using in the course of trade:

(a) any sign which is identical with the trademark in relation to goods or
services which are identical with those for which the trademark is
registered; and

(b) any sign which is identical with or similar to the trademark in relation to
goods or services which are identical with or similar to those for which
the trademark is registered, where such use would result in a likelihood
of confusion on the part of the public.

For greater certainty, a Party shall use the updated versions of the Nice Classification to the
extent that the updated version has been published by WIPO and, in the case of Viet Nam, the
official translation has been published.

For greater certainty, this is without prejudice to Article 12.21 (Exceptions to the Rights
Conferred by a Trademark).

EU/VN/en 188

ARTICLE 12.19
Registration Procedure

1. Each Party shall provide for a system for the registration of trademarks in
which each final refusal to register a trademark by the relevant trademark
administration shall be communicated in writing and be duly reasoned.

2. Each Party shall provide for the possibility to oppose trademark
applications and an opportunity for the trademark applicant to respond to such
opposition.

3. Each Party shall provide a publicly available electronic database of
published trademark applications and trademark registrations.

ARTICLE 12.20
Well-Known Trademarks

For the purposes of giving effect to protection of well-known trademarks, as
referred to in Article 6bis of the Paris Convention and paragraphs 2 and 3 of
Article 16 of the TRIPS Agreement, the Parties shall give consideration to the
Joint Recommendation Concerning Provisions on the Protection of Well-
Known Marks, adopted by the Assembly of the Paris Union for the Protection
of Industrial Property and the General Assembly of the WIPO at the
Thirty-Fourth Series of Meetings of the Assemblies of the Member States of
WIPO on 20 to 29 September 1999.

ARTICLE 12.21
Exceptions to the Rights Conferred by a Trademark
Each Party:

(a) shall provide for the fair use of descriptive terms! as a limited exception

The fair use of descriptive terms includes the use of a sign to indicate the geographic origin of
the goods or services, where such use is in accordance with honest practices in industrial or
commercial matters.

EU/VN/en 189

to the rights conferred by trademarks; and
(b) may provide for other limited exceptions,

provided that these exceptions take account of the legitimate interests of the
owners of the trademarks and of third parties.

ARTICLE 12.22
Revocation of a Registered Trademark

1. Each Party shall provide that a registered trademark shall be liable to
revocation if, within a continuous period of five years prior to a request for
revocation, it has not been put to genuine? use by its owner or the owner's
licensee in the relevant territory in connection with the goods or services in
respect of which it is registered, without justifiable reasons, except where the
use 1s commenced or resumed at least three months before the request for
revocation. A Party may provide that this exception be disregarded where
preparations for the commencement or resumption occur only after the
proprietor becomes aware that the request for revocation may be filed.

2. A Party may provide that a trademark can be liable to revocation if, after
the date on which it was registered, it has become, as a result of acts or
inactivity of the proprietor, the common name in the trade for a product or
service in respect of which it is registered.

3. Any use of a registered trademark by the proprietor of the trademark or
with his consent in respect of the goods or services for which it is registered
that is liable to mislead the public, particularly as to the nature, quality or
geographical origin of those goods or services shall make the trademark liable
to revocation or, alternatively, be prohibited by relevant domestic law.

For Viet Nam "revocation" is equivalent to "termination".

Genuine use implies real use for the purpose of trading in the goods or services in question so
as to generate goodwill. In general, this implies actual sales and there must have been some
sales of the goods or providing of the services during the relevant period of time. Use in
advertising may amount to genuine use. However, mere preparatory steps are not to be
regarded as genuine use of a mark. Genuine use is opposed to token or artificial use designed
solely to maintain the trade mark on the register.

EU/VN/en 190

SUB-SECTION 3

GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS

ARTICLE 12.23
Scope of Application

1. This Sub-Section applies to the recognition and protection of
geographical indications for wines, spirits, agricultural products and foodstuffs
which are originating in the territories of the Parties.

2. Geographical indications of a Party, which are to be protected by the
other Party, shall only be subject to this Sub-Section if they are protected as
geographical indications in accordance with the system referred to in Article
12.24 (System of Registration and Protection of Geographical Indications) in
the territory of the Party of origin.

ARTICLE 12.24
System of Registration and Protection of Geographical Indications

1. Each Party shall maintain a system for the registration and protection of
geographical indications which shall contain at least the following elements:

(a) a register listing geographical indications protected in the territory of that
Party;

(b) an administrative process verifying that geographical indications to be
entered, or maintained, on the register referred to in subparagraph (a)
identify a good as originating in a territory, region or locality of a Party,
where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the good is
essentially attributable to its geographical origin;

(c) an opposition procedure that allows the legitimate interests of any natural
or legal person to be taken into account; and

(d) procedures for rectification and removal or termination of the effects of

EU/VN/en 191

the entries on the register referred to in subparagraph (a) that take into
account the legitimate interests of third parties and the right holders of
the registered geographical indications in question.!

2. Each Party may provide in its domestic legislation more extensive
protection than is required by this Sub-Section, provided that such protection
does not contravene the protection provided under this Agreement.

ARTICLE 12.25
Established Geographical Indications

1. Having completed an opposition procedure and an examination of the
geographical indications of the Union listed in Part A of Annex 12-A (List of
Geographical Indications), Viet Nam recognises that those indications are
geographical indications within the meaning of paragraph 1 of Article 22 of
the TRIPS Agreement and that they have been registered by the Union in
accordance with the system referred to in Article 12.24 (System of
Registration and Protection of Geographical Indications). Viet Nam shall
protect those geographical indications according to the level of protection
provided for in this Agreement.

2. Having completed an opposition procedure and an examination of the
geographical indications of Viet Nam listed in Part B of Annex 12-A (List of
Geographical Indications), the Union recognises that those indications are
geographical indications within the meaning of paragraph 1 of Article 22 of
the TRIPS Agreement and that they have been registered by Viet Nam in
accordance with the system referred to in Article 12.24 (System of
Registration and Protection of Geographical Indications). The Union shall
protect those geographical indications according to the level of protection
provided for in this Agreement.

ARTICLE 12.26

Without prejudice to its domestic legislation on the system of registration and protection of
geographical indications, each Party shall provide for legal means for the invalidation of the
registration of geographical indications.

EU/VN/en 192

Amendment of the List of Geographical Indications

1. The Parties may amend the list of geographical indications in Annex 12-
A (List of Geographical Indications) in accordance with the procedure set out
in subparagraph 3(a) of Article 12.63 (Working Group on Intellectual Property
Rights, including Geographical Indications) and paragraph 1 of Article 17.5
(Amendments) by, inter alia:

(a) removing geographical indications which have ceased to be protected in
the country of origin; or

(b) adding geographical indications, after having completed the opposition
procedure and after having examined the geographical indications as
referred to in Article 12.25 (Established Geographical Indications) to the
satisfaction of both Parties.

2. A geographical indication for wines, spirits, agricultural products or
foodstuffs shall not, in principle, be added to Annex 12-A (List of
Geographical Indications), if it is a name that on the date of signing of this
Agreement is listed in the relevant register of a Party with a status of
"Registered".

ARTICLE 12.27
Protection of Geographical Indications
1. Each Party shall provide the legal means for interested parties to prevent:

(a) the use of a geographical indication of the other Party listed in Annex 12-
A (List of Geographical Indications) for any product that falls within the
product class, as defined in Annex 12-B (Product Classes) and specified
in Annex 12-A (List of Geographical Indications) for that geographical
indication, and that either:

(i) does not originate in the country of origin specified in Annex 12-A
(List of Geographical Indications) for that geographical indication;
or

(ii) originates in the country of origin specified in Annex 12-A (List of

EU/VN/en 193

Geographical Indications) for that geographical indication but was
not produced or manufactured in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the other Party that would apply if the product was for
consumption in the other Party;

(b) the use of any means in the designation or presentation of a good that
indicates or suggests that the good in question originates in a
geographical area other than the true place of origin in a manner which
misleads the public as to the geographical origin or nature of the good;
and

(c) any other use which constitutes an act of unfair competition within the
meaning of Article 10bis of the Paris Convention.

2. The protection referred to in subparagraph 1(a) shall be provided even
where the true origin of the product is indicated or the geographical indication
is used in translation or accompanied by expressions such as "kind", "type", "style", "imitation" or the like.

3. Without prejudice to Article 23 of the TRIPS Agreement, the Parties
shall mutually decide the practical conditions of use under which
homonymous geographical indications will be differentiated from each other,
taking into account the need to ensure equitable treatment of the producers
concerned and that consumers are not misled. A homonymous name which
misleads consumers into believing that a product comes from another territory
shall not be registered even if the name is accurate as far as the actual
territory, region or place of origin of the product in question is concerned.

4. When a Party, in the context of negotiations with a third country,
proposes to protect a geographical indication of the third country which is
homonymous with a geographical indication of the other Party protected under
this Sub-Section, it shall inform the other Party thereof and give it an
opportunity to comment before the third country's geographical indication
becomes protected.

5. Nothing in this Sub-Section shall oblige a Party to protect a geographical
indication of the other Party which is not, or ceases to be, protected in its
country of origin. Each Party shall notify the other Party if a geographical
indication ceases to be protected in the country of origin. Such notification
shall take place in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 12.63 (Working

EU/VN/en 194

Group on Intellectual Property Rights, including Geographical Indications).

6. A Party shall not be required to protect as a geographical indication a
name that conflicts with the name of a plant variety or an animal breed and as
a result is likely to mislead the consumer as to the true origin of the product.

ARTICLE 12.28
Exceptions

1. Notwithstanding Article 12.27 (Protection of Geographical Indications),
the protection of the geographical indications "Asiago", "Fontina" and
"Gorgonzola" listed in Part A of Annex 12-A (List of Geographical
Indications) shall not prevent the use of any of these indications in the territory
of Viet Nam by any persons, including their successors, who made actual
commercial use in good faith of those indications with regard to products in
the class of "cheeses" prior to 1 January 2017.

2. Notwithstanding Article 12.27 (Protection of Geographical Indications),
the protection of the geographical indication "Feta" listed in Part A of Annex
12-A (List of Geographical Indications) shall not prevent the use of this
indication in the territory of Viet Nam by any persons, including their
successors, who made actual commercial use in good faith of this indication
with regard to products in the class of "cheeses" made from sheep's milk or
made from sheep and goat's milk, prior to 1 January 2017.

3. Notwithstanding Article 12.27 (Protection of Geographical Indications),
during a transitional period of 10 years from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement the protection of the geographical indication "Champagne", listed
in Part A of Annex 12-A (List of Geographical Indications), shall not prevent
the use of this indication, or its translation, transliteration or transcription in
the territory of Viet Nam by any persons including their successors, who made
actual commercial use in good faith of this indication with regard to products
in the class of "wines".

4. A Party may provide that any request made under this Sub-Section in
connection with the use or registration of a trademark must be presented
within five years after the adverse use of the protected indication has become

EU/VN/en 195

generally known in that Party or after the date of registration of the trademark
in that Party, provided that the trademark has been published by that date, if
such date is earlier than the date on which the adverse use became generally
known in that Party, provided that the geographical indication is not used or
registered in bad faith.

5. This Sub-Section shall not prejudice the right of any person to use, in the
course of trade, that person's name or the name of that person's predecessor in
business, except where such name is used in such a manner as to mislead the
public.

ARTICLE 12.29
Right of Use of Geographical Indications

Once a geographical indication is protected under this Agreement, the
legitimate use of such geographical indication shall not be subject to any
registration of users, or further charges.

ARTICLE 12.30
Relationship to Trademarks

1. When a trademark has been applied for or registered in good faith, or
when rights to a trademark have been acquired through use in good faith, in a
Party before the applicable date set out in paragraph 2, measures adopted to
implement this Sub-Section in that Party shall not prejudice eligibility for or
the validity of the trademark, or the right to use the trademark, on the basis
that the trademark is identical with, or similar to, a geographical indication.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the applicable date is:

(a) the date of entry into force of this Agreement with regard to the
geographical indications referred to in Article 12.25 (Established
Geographical Indications); or

(b) the date on which the competent authority of a Party receives from the
other Party a request with a complete application for the protection of an

EU/VN/en 196

additional geographical indication as referred to in Article 12.26
(Amendment of the List of Geographical Indications).

3. A trademark as referred to in paragraph | may continue to be protected,
used and renewed notwithstanding the protection of the geographical
indication, provided that no grounds for the trademark's invalidity or
revocation exist in the domestic legislation on trademarks of the Party
concerned.

ARTICLE 12.31
Enforcement of Protection

1. Each Party shall provide for enforcement of protection of geographical
indications by appropriate administrative action, to the extent provided for by
its domestic law, to prohibit a person from manufacturing, preparing,
packaging, labelling, selling, importing or advertising a food commodity in a
manner that is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous
impression regarding its origin.

2. Each Party shall at least enforce the protection provided for in Articles
12.27 (Protection of Geographical Indications) and 12.30 (Relationship to
Trademarks) at the request of an interested party.

ARTICLE 12.32
General Rules

1. Products bearing protected geographical indications shall comply with
the product specifications, including any amendments thereto, approved by the
authorities of the Party in the territory of which the product originates.

2. Any matter arising from product specifications of registered products
shall be dealt with in the Working Group on Intellectual Property Rights,
including Geographical Indications, referred to in Article 12.63 (Working
Group on Intellectual Property Rights, including Geographical Indications).

EU/VN/en 197

ARTICLE 12.33
Cooperation and Transparency

1. The Parties shall, either directly or through the Working Group on
Intellectual Property Rights, including Geographical Indications, referred to in
Article 12.63 (Working Group on Intellectual Property Rights, including
Geographical Indications), maintain contact on all matters relating to the
implementation and functioning of this Sub-Section. In particular, a Party may
request from the other Party information relating to product specifications,
including any amendments thereto, and relevant contact points for control or
management of geographical indications.

2. Each Party may make publicly available the product specifications, or a
summary thereof, and relevant contact points for control or management of
geographical indications of the other Party protected pursuant to this Sub-
Section.

SUB-SECTION 4

INDUSTRIAL DESIGNS

ARTICLE 12.34
International Treaties

The Parties shall accede to the Geneva Act (1999) of the Hague Agreement
Concerning the International Registration of Industrial Designs, done at
Geneva on 2 July 1999, within two years from the date of entry into force of
this Agreement.

ARTICLE 12.35
Protection of Registered Industrial Designs

1. The Parties shall provide for the protection of independently created

EU/VN/en 198

industrial designs! that are new or original. This protection shall be provided
by registration and shall confer an exclusive right upon their holders in
accordance with this Sub-Section.3

2. A design applied to or incorporated in a product which constitutes a
component part of a complex product shall only be considered to be new and
original:

(a) if the component part, once it has been incorporated into the complex
product, remains visible during normal use of the latter; and

(b) to the extent that those visible features of the component part fulfil in
themselves the requirements as to novelty and originality.

3. The term "normal use" in subparagraph 2(a) means use by the end user,
excluding maintenance, servicing or repair work.

4. The owner of a registered design shall have the right to prevent third
parties not having the owner's consent at least from making, offering for sale,
selling, importing, or stocking for sale a product bearing or embodying the
protected design when such acts are undertaken for commercial purposes.

5. The duration of protection available shall amount to at least 15 years.

ARTICLE 12.36
Exceptions and Exclusions
1. A Party may provide limited exceptions to the protection of designs,

The Parties agree that when the domestic law of a Party so provides, a "design" means the
appearance of the whole product or a separable or inseparable part of product.

The Parties agree that when the domestic law of a Party so provides, individual character of
designs can also be required. This refers to designs that significantly differ from known
designs or combinations of known designs' features. The Union considers designs to have
individual character if the overall impression it produces on the informed users differs from
the overall impression produced on such a user by any design which has been made available
to the public.

It is understood that designs are not excluded from protection simply on the basis that they
constitute a part of an article or product, provided that they are visible, fulfil the criteria of
this paragraph, and:

(a) fulfil any other criteria for design protection; and

(b) are not otherwise excluded from design protection,

in accordance with the Parties' respective domestic law.

EU/VN/en 199

provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with the normal
exploitation of protected designs, and do not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the owner of the protected design, taking account of the
legitimate interests of third parties.

2. Industrial design protection shall not extend to designs dictated
essentially by technical or functional considerations.

ARTICLE 12.37
Relationship to Copyright

A design shall also be eligible for protection under the law of copyright of a
Party as from the date on which the design was created or, alternatively, fixed
in any form. The eligibility for protection, the extent to which, and the
conditions under which, such a copyright protection is conferred, including the
level of originality required, shall be determined by that Party.

SUB-SECTION 5

PATENTS

ARTICLE 12.38
International Agreements

The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the Patent Cooperation
Treaty, done at Washington on 19 June 1970, as amended on 28 September
1979 and last modified on 3 October 2001. Each Party shall simplify and
develop its patent registration procedures using, inter alia, the Patent Law
Treaty, adopted in Geneva on | June 2000, as a reference point.

EU/VN/en 200

ARTICLE 12.39
Patents and Public Health

1. The Parties recognise the importance of the Declaration on the TRIPS
Agreement and Public Health, adopted on 14 November 2001 by the
Ministerial Conference of the WTO, in Doha. In interpreting and
implementing the rights and obligations under this Chapter, the Parties are
entitled to rely upon that Declaration.

2. The Parties shall respect the Decision of the WTO General Council of 30
August 2003 on Implementation of Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on
the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health.

ARTICLE 12.40
Administrative Authorisation

1. The Parties recognise that pharmaceutical products protected by a patent
on their respective territory are generally subject to an administrative
authorisation procedure before being put on their market (hereinafter referred
to as the "marketing authorisation procedure").

2. Each Party shall provide for an adequate and effective mechanism to
compensate the patent owner for the reduction in the effective patent life
resulting from unreasonable delays! in the granting of the first marketing
authorisation in its respective territory. Such compensation may be in the form
of an extension of the duration of the rights conferred by patent protection,
equal to the time by which the period referred to in the footnote to this
paragraph is exceeded. The maximum duration of this extension shall not
exceed two years.

3. As an alternative to paragraph 2, a Party may make available an
extension, not exceeding five years, of the duration of the rights conferred by

1 For the purposes of this Article, an "unreasonable delay" includes at least a delay of more

than two years in the first response to the applicant following the date of filing of the
application for marketing authorisation. Any delays that occur in the granting of a marketing
authorisation due to periods attributable to the applicant or any period that is out of control of
the marketing authorisation authority need not be included in the determination of such delay.
This period can be extended for a further six months in the case of medicinal products for

EU/VN/en 201

the patent protection to compensate the patent owner for the reduction in the
effective patent life as a result of the marketing authorisation procedure. The
duration of the extension shall take effect at the end of the lawful term of the
patent for a period equal to the period which elapsed between the date on
which the application for a patent was filed and the date of the first marketing
authorisation to place the product on the market in the Party, reduced by a
period of five years.

SUB-SECTION 6

PROTECTION OF UNDISCLOSED INFORMATION

ARTICLE 12.41
Protection of Undisclosed Information

1. In order to implement Article 39 of the TRIPS Agreement, and in the
course of ensuring effective protection against unfair competition as provided
for in Article 10bis of the Paris Convention, each Party shall protect
confidential information and data submitted to government or governmental
agencies in accordance with this Article.

2. If a Party requires, as a condition for approving the marketing of
pharmaceutical or agrochemical products, the submission of undisclosed test
or other data, the origination of which involves a considerable effort, the Party
shall protect such data against unfair commercial use. In addition, each Party
shall protect such data against disclosure, except where necessary to protect
the public.

3. Each Party shall provide that for data referred to in paragraph 2 that is
submitted to the Party after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, no
other applicant for marketing approval may, without permission of the person
that submitted the data, rely on that data in support of an application for
marketing approval during a reasonable period, which shall normally mean not
less than five years from the date on which the Party granted approval to the

which paediatric studies have been carried out, where the results of those studies are reflected

EU/VN/en 202

person that produced the data for approval to market its product.

SUB-SECTION 7

PLANT VARIETIES RIGHTS

ARTICLE 12.42
Plant Varieties Rights

The Parties shall protect plant varieties rights in accordance with the
International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants,
adopted in Paris on 2 December 1961, as last revised in Geneva on 19 March
1991, including the exceptions to the breeder's right as referred to in Article 15
of that Convention, and cooperate to promote and enforce these rights.

SECTION C

ENFORCEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

SUB-SECTION 1

GENERAL ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 12.43
General Obligations
1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the TRIPS
Agreement, in particular Part III thereof. Each Party shall provide for the
complementary measures, procedures and remedies under this Section

in the product information.

EU/VN/en 203

necessary to ensure the enforcement of intellectual property rights.' Those
measures, procedures and remedies shall be fair and equitable, and shall not be
unnecessarily complicated or costly, or entail unreasonable time limits or
unwarranted delays.

2. The measures, procedures and remedies referred to in paragraph 1 shall
be effective and proportionate and shall be applied in such a manner as to
avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade and to provide for safeguards
against their abuse.

ARTICLE 12.44
Entitled Applicants

Each Party shall recognise as persons entitled to seek application of the
measures, procedures and remedies referred to in this Section and in Part III of
the TRIPS Agreement:

(a) the holders of intellectual property rights in accordance with the
provisions of the applicable law;

(b) all other persons authorised to use those intellectual property rights, in
particular licensees, in so far as permitted by, and in accordance with the
provisions of the applicable law;

(c) intellectual property collective rights management bodies which are
regularly recognised as having a right to represent holders of intellectual
property rights, in so far as permitted by, and in accordance with, the
provisions of the applicable law; and

(d) professional defence bodies which are regularly recognised as having a
right to represent holders of intellectual property rights, in so far as
permitted by, and in accordance with, the provisions of the applicable
law.

For the purposes of this Sub-Section, the term "intellectual property rights" should include at
least the following rights: copyright; rights related to copyright; rights of the creator of the
topographies of a semi-conductor product; trademark rights; design rights; patent rights;
geographical indications; utility model rights; plant variety rights; trade names in so far as
they are protected as intellectual property rights in the domestic law concerned.

EU/VN/en 204

1.

SUB-SECTION 2

CIVIL ENFORCEMENT

ARTICLE 12.45

Provisional Measures

Each Party shall ensure that its competent judicial authorities, upon

request by a party who has presented reasonably available evidence to support
his claims that his intellectual property right has been infringed or is about to
be infringed, have the authority to order prompt and effective provisional
measures to:

(a) prevent an infringement of any intellectual property right from occurring,

(b)

and, in particular, to prevent the entry into, and the movement within, the
channels of commerce in their jurisdiction of goods, including imported
goods immediately after customs clearance:

(i) an interlocutory injunction may be issued against a party whose
services are being used by a third party to infringe an intellectual
property right and over whom the relevant judicial authority
exercises jurisdiction; and

(ii) in the case of an alleged infringement that is committed on a
commercial scale, the Parties shall ensure that, if the applicant
referred to in Article 12.44 (Entitled Applicants) demonstrates
circumstances likely to endanger the recovery of damages, the
judicial authorities may order the precautionary seizure or blocking
of the movable and immovable property of the alleged infringer,
including the blocking of his/her bank accounts and other assets;

and

preserve relevant evidence in respect of the alleged infringement, subject
to the protection of confidential information, which may include the
detailed description, with or without the taking of samples, or the
physical seizure of the alleged infringing goods and, in appropriate cases,
the materials and implements used in the production or distribution of

EU/VN/en 205

these goods, and the documents relating thereto.

2. Where appropriate, in particular where any delay is likely to cause
irreparable harm to the right holder or where there is a demonstrable risk of
evidence being destroyed, the judicial authorities shall have the authority to
adopt the provisional measures referred to in paragraph | without the other
party being heard.

3. This Article is without prejudice to Article 50 of the TRIPS Agreement.

ARTICLE 12.46
Evidence

1. Each Party shall ensure that, on application by a party which has
presented reasonably available evidence sufficient to support its claims and
which has, in substantiating those claims, specified evidence which lies in the
control of the opposing party, the competent judicial authorities may order that
such evidence be presented by the opposing party, subject to the protection of
confidential information. For the purposes of this paragraph, a Party may
provide that a reasonable sample of a substantial number of copies of a work
or any other protected object be considered by the competent judicial
authorities to constitute reasonable evidence.

2. In the case of an infringement committed on a commercial scale each
Party shall take such measures as are necessary to enable the competent
judicial authorities to order, where appropriate, on application by a party, the
communication of banking, financial or commercial documents under the
control of the opposing party, subject to the protection of confidential
information.

ARTICLE 12.47
Right of Information

1. Without prejudice to its domestic law governing the protection of
confidentiality of information or processing of personal data, each Party shall

EU/VN/en 206

ensure that, in civil proceedings concerning an infringement of an intellectual
property right and in response to a justified and proportionate request of the
applicant, the competent judicial authorities may order the infringer, the
alleged infringer or any other person to provide information, as provided for in
its domestic laws and regulations, that the person concerned possesses or
controls.

For the purposes of this paragraph, the term "any other person" may include a
person who was:

(a) found in possession of the infringing goods on a commercial scale;
(b) found to be using the infringing services on a commercial scale;

(c) found to be providing on a commercial scale services used in infringing
activities; or

(d) indicated by the person referred to in this paragraph as being involved in
the production, manufacture or distribution of the infringing goods or the
provision of the infringing services.

2. The information referred to in paragraph 1 may include information
regarding any person involved on a commercial scale in the infringement or
alleged infringement, and regarding the means of production and distribution
networks of the infringing goods or services.

ARTICLE 12.48
Other Remedies

1. Each Party shall ensure that the competent judicial authorities shall have
the authority to order, upon request of the applicant and without prejudice to
any damages due to the right holder by reason of the infringement, and
without compensation of any sort in such a manner as to minimise the risks of
further infringements:

(a) the recall from the channels of commerce;!

1 Each Party shall ensure that this provision applies to infringing goods found in the channels

of commerce and that infringers should be ordered to at least recall the goods from their

EU/VN/en 207

(b) the disposal outside the channels of commerce; or
(c) the destruction,
of goods that they have found to be infringing an intellectual property right.

The competent judicial authorities may also order destruction of materials and
implements, the predominant use of which has been in the creation or
manufacture of the infringing goods, or their disposal outside the channels of
commerce in such a manner as to minimise the risks of further infringements.

2. The competent judicial authorities shall have the authority to order that
the remedies referred to in paragraph 1, at least for the destruction, including
the removal from the channels of commerce for destruction, be carried out at
the expense of the infringer, unless particular reasons are invoked for not
doing so.

ARTICLE 12.49
Injunctions

Each Party shall ensure that, when a judicial decision finds an infringement of
an intellectual property right, the competent judicial authorities may issue
against the infringer and, where appropriate, against a party whose services are
being used by the infringer and over whom the judicial authority exercises
jurisdiction, an injunction aimed at prohibiting the continuation of the
infringement.

ARTICLE 12.50
Alternative Measures

A Party may provide that, in appropriate cases and upon request of the person
liable to be subject to the measures provided for in Article 12.48 (Other
Remedies) or Article 12.49 (Injunctions), the competent judicial authorities
may order pecuniary compensation to be paid to the injured party instead of

customers, such as wholesalers, distributors, retailers.

EU/VN/en 208

applying the measures provided for in Article 12.48 (Other Remedies) and
Article 12.49 (Injunctions) if that person acted unintentionally and without
negligence, if execution of the measures in question would cause him
disproportionate harm and if pecuniary compensation to the injured party
appears reasonably satisfactory.

ARTICLE 12.51
Damages

1. Each Party shall ensure that the competent judicial authorities have the
authority to order the infringer who knowingly, or with reasonable grounds to
know, engaged in an infringing activity, to pay the right holder damages to
compensate for the actual injury the right holder has suffered as a result of the
infringement.

In determining the amount of damages for infringement of intellectual
property rights, the competent judicial authorities shall have the authority to:

(a) take into account all appropriate aspects, such as the negative economic
consequences, including lost profits, which the injured party has suffered,
any unfair profits made by the infringer! and, in appropriate cases,
elements other than economic factors; and

(b) in appropriate cases, set the damages as a lump sum on the basis of
elements such as, at least, the amount of royalties or fees which would
have been due if the infringer had requested authorisation to use the
intellectual property right in question.

2. Where the infringer did not engage, knowingly or with reasonable
grounds to know, in infringing activity, a Party may provide that the
competent judicial authorities may order in favour of the injured party the
recovery of profits or the payment of damages which may be pre-established.

The calculation of unfair profits made by the infringer shall not be duplicated in calculating
lost profits.

The term "elements other than economic factors" shall include moral prejudice caused by the
infringement of moral rights of inventors or authors.

EU/VN/en 209

ARTICLE 12.52
Legal Costs

Each Party shall provide that the competent judicial authorities, as a general
rule and, where appropriate, have the authority to order that the prevailing
party be awarded payment by the losing party of court costs or fees and
appropriate attorney's fees, or any other expenses as provided for under that
Party's domestic law.

ARTICLE 12.53
Publication of Judicial Decisions

The competent judicial authorities shall have the authority to order, pursuant
to its domestic law and policies, the publishing or making available to the
public, at the expense of the infringer, appropriate information concerning the
final judicial decision.

ARTICLE 12.54
Presumption of Authorship or Ownership

The Parties recognise that, for the purposes of applying the measures,
procedures and remedies provided for in this Chapter, it is sufficient for the
name of an author of a literary or artistic work, and for the name of other right
holders with regard to their protected subject-matter, to appear on the work or
protected subject-matter in the usual manner in order for that author or other
right holder to be regarded as such, unless there is proof to the contrary, and
consequently to be entitled to institute infringement proceedings.

EU/VN/en 210

1.

SUB-SECTION 3

INTERMEDIARY SERVICE PROVIDERS

ARTICLE 12.55
Liability of Intermediary Service Providers

Each Party shall, in accordance with this Article, provide for limitations

or exemptions in its domestic legislation regarding the liability of intermediary
service providers, in relation to the provision or use of their services, for
infringements of copyright or related rights that take place on or through
telecommunication networks!.

2.

The limitations or exemptions referred to in paragraph 1 shall cover at

least the following activities:

(a)

(b)

the transmission in a telecommunication network of information provided
by a user of the service, or the provision of access to a
telecommunication network ("mere conduit");

the transmission in a telecommunication network of information provided
by a user of the service concerning the automatic, intermediate and
temporary storage of that information, performed for the sole purpose of
making more efficient the information's onward transmission to other
users of the service upon their request ("caching"), on condition that the
provider:

(1) does not modify the information other than for technical reasons;
(11) complies with conditions on access to the information;

(111) complies with rules regarding the updating of the information,
specified in a manner widely recognised and used by industry;

(iv) does not interfere with the lawful use of technology, widely
recognised and used by industry, to obtain data on the use of the
information; and

For greater certainty, this includes the Internet.

EU/VN/en 211

(v) removes or disables access to the information it has stored upon
obtaining knowledge! of the fact that the information at the initial
source of the transmission has been removed from the network, or
access to it has been disabled;

and

(c) the storage of information provided by a user of the service at the request
of a user of the service ("hosting") on condition that the provider:

(i) does not have the knowledge of illegal information; and

(ii) upon obtaining such knowledge, acts expeditiously to remove or to
disable access to the information concerned.

3. Each Party may in its domestic law provide for conditions under which
intermediary service providers do not qualify for the limitations or exceptions
set out in paragraph 2.

4. The eligibility conditions for intermediary service providers to qualify for
the limitations or exceptions in paragraph 2 shall not include the intermediary
service provider monitoring its service, or seeking facts indicating infringing
activity.

5. Each Party may establish procedures for effective notifications of
claimed infringement, and effective counter-notifications.

6. This Article shall not affect the possibility for a court or administrative
authority, in accordance with each Party's legal system, to require the
intermediary service provider to terminate or prevent an infringement.

Nothing in this Chapter precludes either Party from defining in its domestic law conditions
for determining how the knowledge of illegal information being hosted is obtained.
Nothing in this Chapter precludes either Party from defining in its domestic law conditions
for determining how the knowledge of illegal information being hosted is obtained.

EU/VN/en 212

SUB-SECTION 4

BORDER ENFORCEMENT

ARTICLE 12.56
Consistency with GATT 1994 and the TRIPS Agreement

In implementing border measures for the enforcement of intellectual property
rights by customs authorities, as set out in this Sub-Section, the Parties shall
ensure consistency with their obligations under GATT 1994 and the TRIPS
Agreement and, in particular, with Article V of GATT 1994 and Article 41
and Section 4 of Part III of the TRIPS Agreement.

ARTICLE 12.57
Definitions
For the purposes of this Sub-Section:

(a) "counterfeit goods" means counterfeit trademark goods and counterfeit
geographical indication goods;

(b) "counterfeit geographical indication goods" means goods, including
packaging, unlawfully bearing a geographical indication identical with
the geographical indication validly registered in respect of the same type
of goods, or which cannot be distinguished in its essential aspects from
such a geographical indication, and the importation of which thereby
infringes or the exportation of which would have constituted an
infringement of the rights of the geographical indication in question
according to the law of the Party where the goods are found;

(c) "counterfeit trademark goods" means goods, including packaging,
bearing without authorisation a trademark which is identical with the
trademark validly registered in respect of such goods, or which cannot be
distinguished in its essential aspects from such a trademark, and the
importation of which thereby infringes or the exportation of which would
have constituted an infringement of the rights of the owner of the

EU/VN/en 213

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

I.

trademark in question according to the law of the Party where the goods
are found;

"export goods" means goods which are to be taken from the territory of a
Party to a place outside that territory, while those goods remain under
customs control;

"goods infringing an intellectual property right" means counterfeit goods
and pirated copyright goods the importation or exportation of which,
according to the law of the Party where the goods are found, infringe an
intellectual property right;

"import goods" means goods brought into the territory of a Party from a
place outside that territory, while those goods remain under customs
control; and

"pirated copyright goods" means goods which are copies made without
the consent of the right holder or person duly authorised by the right
holder in the country of production and which are made directly or
indirectly from an article where the making of that copy, as well as
importation or exportation, would have constituted an infringement of a
copyright or a related right under the law of the Party of importation or
exportation, respectively.

ARTICLE 12.58
Scope of Border Measures

With respect to import and export goods, each Party shall adopt or

maintain procedures under which a right holder can submit applications
requesting customs authorities to suspend the import or export of goods

suspected of infringing intellectual property rights.

2.

The customs authorities shall, in accordance with domestic procedures,

suspend the release of the goods suspected of infringing an intellectual
property right.

EU/VN/en 214

ARTICLE 12.59
Active Involvement of Customs Authorities

The customs authorities shall, on the basis of risk analysis techniques, be
active in targeting and identifying shipments containing import and export
goods suspected of infringing intellectual property rights. They shall cooperate
with right holders, including allowing the provision of information for risk
analysis.

ARTICLE 12.60
Specific Cooperation in the Area of Border Measures

1. Without prejudice to subparagraph 2(a) of Article 4.2 (Customs
Cooperation and Mutual Administrative Assistance), the Parties shall, where
appropriate, promote cooperation and exchange of information and best
practices between their customs authorities to enable effective border controls
for the purposes of enforcement of intellectual property rights, particularly in
order to effectively implement Article 69 of the TRIPS Agreement.

2. With regard to the customs enforcement of intellectual property rights the
customs authorities of the Parties shall provide each other with mutual
administrative assistance in accordance with Protocol2 (On Mutual
Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters).

3. Without prejudice to Article 17.1 (Trade Committee), the Committee on
Customs referred to in Article 17.2 (Specialised Committees), shall be
responsible for ensuring the proper functioning and implementation of this
Article. The Committee on Customs shall set the priorities and provide for the
adequate procedures for cooperation between the competent authorities.

EU/VN/en 215

SUB-SECTION 5

OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO ENFORCEMENT

ARTICLE 12.61
Codes of Conduct
The Parties shall encourage:

(a) the development, by trade or professional associations or organisations,
of codes of conduct aimed at contributing towards the enforcement of
intellectual property rights; and

(b) the submission to the competent authorities of the Parties of draft codes
of conduct and of any evaluations of the application of those codes of
conduct.

SECTION D

COOPERATION AND INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 12.62
Cooperation

1. The Parties shall cooperate with a view to supporting the implementation
of this Chapter.

2. Subject to Chapter 16 (Cooperation and Capacity Building), areas of
cooperation include, but are not limited to, the following activities:

(a) exchange of information on the legal framework concerning intellectual
property rights and relevant rules of protection and enforcement as well
as exchange of experiences between the Union and Viet Nam on
legislative progress;

EU/VN/en 216

(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)

(f)

(g)

3.

exchange of experiences and information between the Union and Viet
Nam on enforcement of intellectual property rights;

exchange of experiences between the Union and Viet Nam on
enforcement at central and sub-central levels by customs, police,
administrative and judiciary bodies as well as coordination of their
actions to prevent exports of counterfeit goods, including with other
countries;

capacity building, and exchange and training of personnel;

promotion and dissemination of information on intellectual property
rights in, inter alia, business circles, socio-professional and social
organisations as well as promotion of public awareness of consumers and
right holders;

enhancement of intergovernmental cooperation between, inter alia,
intellectual property offices; and

active promotion of awareness and education of the general public on
intellectual property rights policies by formulating effective strategies to
identify key audiences and creating communication programmes to
increase consumer and media awareness on the impact of intellectual
property violations, including the risk to health and safety and the
connection to organised crime.

Without prejudice to paragraphs | and 2, the Parties agree to address, as

necessary, topics relevant to the protection and enforcement of intellectual
property rights covered by this Chapter, and also any other relevant issue in
the Working Group on Intellectual Property Rights, including Geographical
Indications, established pursuant to Article 17.3 (Working Groups).

1.

ARTICLE 12.63

Working Group on Intellectual Property Rights,
including Geographical Indications

The Working Group on Intellectual Property Rights, including

Geographical Indications, established pursuant to Article 17.3 (Working

EU/VN/en 217

Groups), shall consist of representatives of the Parties for the purposes of
monitoring the implementation of this Chapter, intensifying their cooperation
and holding dialogues on intellectual property rights, including geographical
indications.

2. The Working Group on Intellectual Property Rights, including
Geographical Indications may consider any matter related to the
implementation and operation of this Chapter. In particular, it shall be
responsible for:

(a) preparing a recommendation for the Parties to amend Annex 12-A (List
of Geographical Indications) as regards geographical indications in
accordance with Article 12.26 (Amendment of the List of Geographical
Indications);

(b) exchanging information on legislative and policy developments on
geographical indications and any other matter of mutual interest in the
area of geographical indications; and

(c) exchanging information on geographical indications for the purposes of
considering their protection in accordance with Sub-Section 3
(Geographical Indications) of Section B (Standards Concerning
Intellectual Property Rights) of this Chapter.

CHAPTER 13

TRADE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

ARTICLE 13.1
Objectives

1. The objective of this Chapter is to promote sustainable development,
notably by fostering the contribution of trade and investment related aspects of
labour and environmental issues.

2. The Parties recall the Agenda 21 on Environment and Development of
1992, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on

EU/VN/en 218

Sustainable Development of 2002, the Ministerial Declaration of the United
Nations Economic and Social Council on Full Employment and Decent Work
of 2006, the International Labour Organisation (hereinafter referred to as
"ILO") Decent Work Agenda, the Outcome Document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development of 2012, entitled The future we want,
and the Outcome Document of the United Nations Summit on Sustainable
Development of 2015, entitled Transforming Our World: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. They affirm their commitment to promote the
development of international trade in such a way as to contribute to the
objective of sustainable development, for the welfare of present and future
generations. The objective of sustainable development shall be integrated in
their bilateral trade relationship.

3. The Parties affirm their commitment to pursue sustainable development,
which consists of economic development, social development and
environmental protection all three being inter-dependent and mutually
reinforcing.

4. The Parties underline the benefits of cooperating on trade-related labour!
and environmental issues as part of the global approach to trade and
sustainable development.

5. This Chapter embodies a cooperative approach based on common values
and interests, taking into account the differences in the Parties' respective
levels of development.

ARTICLE 13.2
Right to Regulate and Levels of Protection
1. The Parties recognise their respective right to:

(a) determine its sustainable development objectives, strategies, policies and
priorities;

For the purposes of this Chapter, "labour issues" means those under the Decent Work
Agenda, as referred to in the LO Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalisation,
adopted by the International Labour Conference at its 97th Session in Geneva on 10 June
2008.

EU/VN/en 219

(b) establish its own levels of domestic protection in the environmental and
social areas as it deems appropriate; and

(c) adopt or modify accordingly its relevant laws and policies in a manner
consistent with the internationally recognised standards, and_ the
agreements, to which a Party is a party, referred to in Articles 13.4
(Multilateral Labour Standards and Agreements) and 13.5 (Multilateral
Environmental Agreements).

2. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that its laws and policies provide
for and encourage high levels of domestic protection in the environmental and
social areas and shall continuously endeavour to improve those laws and
policies.

ARTICLE 13.3
Upholding Levels of Protection

1. The Parties stress that weakening the levels of protection in
environmental or labour areas is detrimental to the objectives of this Chapter
and that it is inappropriate to encourage trade and investment by weakening
the levels of protection afforded in domestic environmental or labour law.

2. A Party shall not waive or derogate from, or offer to waive or derogate
from, its environmental or labour laws, in a manner affecting trade and
investment between the Parties.

3. A Party shall not, through a sustained or recurring course of action or
inaction, fail to effectively enforce its environmental and labour laws, as an
encouragement for trade and investment.

4. A Party shall not apply environmental and labour laws in a manner that
would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between
the Parties or a disguised restriction on trade.

EU/VN/en 220

ARTICLE 13.4
Multilateral Labour Standards and Agreements

1. The Parties recognise the importance of full and productive employment
and decent work for all, in particular as a response to globalisation. The
Parties reaffirm their commitment to promote the development of their
bilateral trade in a way that is conducive to full and productive employment
and decent work for all, including for women and young people. In this
context, the Parties shall consult and cooperate, as appropriate, on trade-
related labour issues of mutual interest.

2. Each Party reaffirms its commitments, in accordance with its obligations
under the ILO and the JLO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights
at Work and its Follow-up, adopted by the International Labour Conference at
its 86th Session in 1998, to respect, promote and effectively implement the
principles concerning the fundamental rights at work, namely:

(a) the freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to
collective bargaining;

(b) the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour;
(c) the effective abolition of child labour; and

(d) the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and
occupation.

3. Each Party shall:

(a) make continued and sustained efforts towards ratifying, to the extent it
has not yet done so, the fundamental ILO conventions;

(b) consider the ratification of other conventions that are classified as up to
date by the ILO, taking into account its domestic circumstances; and

(c) exchange information with the other Party with regard to the ratifications
mentioned in subparagraphs (a) and (b).

4. Each Party reaffirms its commitment to effectively implement in its
domestic laws and regulations and practice the ILO conventions ratified by
Viet Nam and the Member States of the Union, respectively.

EU/VN/en 221

5. The Parties recognise that the violation of fundamental principles and
rights at work cannot be invoked or otherwise used as a legitimate
comparative advantage and that labour standards should not be used for
protectionist trade purposes.

ARTICLE 13.5
Multilateral Environmental Agreements

1. The Parties recognise the value of multilateral environmental governance
and agreements as a response of the international community to environmental
challenges and stress the need to enhance the mutual supportiveness between
trade and environment. The Parties shall consult and cooperate, as appropriate,
with respect to trade-related environmental issues of mutual interest.

2. Each Party reaffirms its commitment to effectively implement in its
domestic law and practice the multilateral environmental agreements to which
it 1s a party.

3. The Parties shall exchange in the Committee on Trade and Sustainable
Development and, as appropriate, on other occasions, information and
experiences on their respective situation and progress with regard to the
ratification of multilateral environmental agreements or their amendments.

4. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from adopting or
maintaining measures to implement the multilateral environmental agreements
to which it is a party, provided that such measures are not applied in a manner
which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination
between the Parties or a disguised restriction on trade.

ARTICLE 13.6
Climate Change

1. In order to address the urgent threat of climate change, the Parties
reaffirm their commitment to reaching the ultimate objective of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change of 1992 (hereinafter

EU/VN/en 222

referred to as "UNFCCC") and to effectively implementing the UNFCCC, the
Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention On Climate
Change, as last amended on 8 December 2012 (hereinafter referred to as
"Kyoto Protocol"), and the Paris Agreement, done at 12 December 2015,
established thereunder. The Parties shall cooperate on the implementation of
the UNFCCC, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement. The Parties shall,
as appropriate, cooperate and promote the positive contribution of this Chapter
to enhance the capacities of the Parties in the transition to low greenhouse gas
emissions and climate-resilient economies, in accordance with the Paris
Agreement.

2. Within the UNFCCC framework, the Parties recognise the role of
domestic policies in addressing climate change. Accordingly, the Parties shall
consult and share information and experiences of priority or of mutual interest,
including:

(a) best practices and lessons learned in designing, implementing, and
operating mechanisms for pricing carbon;

(b) the promotion of domestic and international carbon markets, including
through mechanisms such as Emissions Trading Schemes and Reducing
Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation; and

(c) the promotion of energy efficiency, low-emission technology and
renewable energy.

ARTICLE 13.7
Biological Diversity

1. The Parties recognise the importance of ensuring the conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity in accordance with the Convention on
Biological Diversity of 1992 (hereinafter referred to as "CBD") and the
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets,
adopted at the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties in Nagoya on
18 to 29 October 2010, Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, as last amended in Gaborone in 1983
(hereinafter referred to as "CITES"), and other relevant international

EU/VN/en 223

instruments to which they are party, as well as the decisions adopted
thereunder.

2. The Parties recognise, in accordance with Article 15 of the CBD, the
sovereign rights of states over their natural resources, and that the authority to
determine access to their genetic resources rests with their respective
governments and is subject to their domestic law. The Parties shall endeavour
to create conditions to facilitate access to genetic resources for
environmentally sound uses and not to impose restrictions that run counter to
the objectives of the CBD. The Parties recognise that access to genetic
resources shall be subject to the prior informed consent of the Party providing
genetic resources, unless otherwise determined by that Party.

3. To this end, each Party shall:

(a) encourage trade in products which contribute to the sustainable use and
conservation of biological diversity, in accordance with its domestic laws
and regulations;

(b) promote and encourage the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity, including access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable
sharing of benefits arising from their utilisation;

(c) exchange information with the other Party on actions such as strategies,
policy initiatives, programmes, action plans, consumers awareness
campaigns of relevance in a trade context which aim at halting the loss of
biological diversity and reducing pressures on biological diversity and,
where relevant, cooperate to maximise the impact and ensure the mutual
supportiveness of its respective policies;

(d) adopt and implement appropriate effective measures, which are
consistent with its commitments under international treaties to which it is
a party, leading to a reduction of illegal trade in wildlife, such as
awareness raising campaigns, monitoring and enforcement measures;

(e) enhance cooperation with the other Party, as appropriate, to propose new
animal and plant species to be included in Appendices I and II to the
CITES; and

(f) cooperate with the other Party at regional and global levels, as

EU/VN/en 224

1.

appropriate, with the aim of promoting the conservation and sustainable
use of biological diversity in natural or agricultural ecosystems, including
endangered species, their habitat, specially protected natural areas and
genetic diversity; the restoration of ecosystems; the elimination or
reduction of negative environmental impacts resulting from the use of
living and non-living natural resources, including ecosystems; the access
to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising
from their utilisation.

ARTICLE 13.8
Sustainable Forest Management and Trade in Forest Products

The Parties recognise the importance of ensuring the conservation and

sustainable management of forest resources in contributing to their economic,

environmental and social objectives.

2.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

To this end, each Party shall:

encourage the promotion of trade in forest products from sustainably
managed forests and harvested in accordance with the domestic
legislation of the country of harvest; this may include the conclusion of
the Forest Law Enforcement Governance and Trade ("FLEGT")
Voluntary Partnership Agreement;

exchange information with the other Party on measures to promote
consumption of timber and timber products from sustainably managed
forests and, where relevant, cooperate to develop such measures;

adopt measures which are consistent with domestic laws and
international treaties to which it is a party, to promote the conservation of
forest resources and combat illegal logging and related trade;

exchange information with the other Party on actions, as appropriate, to
improve forest law enforcement and, where relevant, cooperate to
maximise the impact and ensure the mutual supportiveness of their
respective policies aiming at excluding illegally harvested timber and
timber products from trade flows; and

EU/VN/en 225

(e)

1.

cooperate with the other Party at regional and global levels, as
appropriate, with the aim of promoting the conservation and sustainable
management of all types of forests.

ARTICLE 13.9

Trade and Sustainable Management of Living Marine Resources
and Aquaculture Products

The Parties recognise the importance of ensuring the conservation and

sustainable management of living marine resources and marine ecosystems as

well as the promotion of responsible and sustainable aquaculture.

2.

(a)

(b)

To this end, each Party shall:

comply with long-term conservation and management measures and
sustainable exploitation of marine living resources as defined in
UNCLOS; encourage compliance with the Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, done at New York on 24 July to 4 August 1995, the Agreement to
Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management
Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas, approved by the Food
and Agriculture Organisation Conference at its 27th Session in
November 1993, and the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent,
Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing,
approved by the Food and Agriculture Organisation Conference on
22 November 2009; and adhere to the principles of the Code of Conduct
for Responsible Fisheries, adopted by the Food and Agriculture
Organisation Conference in Cancun on 31 October 1995;

cooperate with the other Party, as appropriate, with and within Regional
Fisheries Management Organisations to which it is a member, observer
or cooperating non-contracting party, including through effective
application of their monitoring, control and surveillance and enforcement
of management measures and, where applicable, implement their Catch
Documentation or Certification Schemes;

EU/VN/en 226

(c)

(d)

(e)

1.

cooperate with the other Party and actively engage in the fight against
illegal, unreported and unregulated (hereinafter referred to as "[UU")
fishing and fishing-related activities with comprehensive, effective and
transparent measures to combat IUU; each Party shall also facilitate the
exchange of information on IUU activities and implement policies and
measures to exclude products resulting from [UU from trade flows;

promote the development of sustainable aquaculture, taking into account
its economic, social and environmental aspects; and

exchange information on all new measures on management of living
marine resources and fishery products that may impact trade between the
Parties, in the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development and, as
appropriate, on other occasions.

ARTICLE 13.10
Trade and Investment Favouring Sustainable Development

Each Party affirms its commitment to enhance the contribution of trade

and investment to the goal of sustainable development in its economic, social
and environmental dimensions.

2.

(a)

(b)

(c)

To that end, the Parties:

recognise the beneficial role that decent work may have for economic
efficiency, innovation and productivity, and they shall encourage greater
policy coherence between trade policies, on the one hand, and labour
policies on the other;

shall endeavour to facilitate and promote trade and investment in
environmental goods and services, in a manner consistent with this
Agreement;

shall endeavour to facilitate trade and investment in goods and services
of particular relevance for climate change mitigation, such as sustainable
renewable energy and energy efficient goods and services, including
through the development of policy frameworks conducive to the
deployment of best available technologies;

EU/VN/en 227

(d) recognise that voluntary initiatives can contribute to the achievement and
maintenance of high levels of environmental and labour protection and
complement domestic regulatory measures; therefore each Party shall, in
accordance with its domestic laws or policies, encourage the
development of, and participation in, such initiatives, including voluntary
sustainable assurance schemes such as fair and ethical trade schemes and
eco-labels; and

(e) in accordance with their domestic laws or policies agree to promote
corporate social responsibility, provided that measures related thereto are
not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or
unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties or a disguised restriction
on trade; measures for the promotion of corporate social responsibility
include, among others, exchange of information and best practices,
education and training activities and technical advice; in this regard, each
Party takes into account relevant internationally agreed instruments that
have been endorsed or are supported by that Party, such as the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Guidelines
for Multinational Enterprises, the United Nations Global Compact and
the ILO Tripartite Declaration of Principles concerning Multinational
Enterprises and Social Policy.

ARTICLE 13.11
Scientific Information

When preparing and implementing measures aimed at protecting the
environment or labour conditions that may affect trade and investment, each
Party shall take into account relevant available scientific, technical and
innovation-related information, and relevant international standards,
guidelines or recommendations, including the precautionary principle.

ARTICLE 13.12
Transparency

Each Party shall, in accordance with its domestic law and Chapter 14

EU/VN/en 228

(Transparency), ensure that any measures aimed at protecting the environment
and labour conditions that may affect trade and investment are developed,
introduced and implemented in a transparent manner, with due notice and an
opportunity for interested persons to provide their views.

ARTICLE 13.13
Review of Sustainability Impact

The Parties shall, jointly or individually, review, monitor and assess the
impact of the implementation of this Agreement on sustainable development
through their respective policies, practices, participative processes and
institutions.

ARTICLE 13.14
Working Together on Trade and Sustainable Development

1. The Parties, recognising the importance of working together on trade-
related aspects of sustainable development in order to achieve the objectives
of this Chapter, may work together in, inter alia, the following areas:

(a) trade and sustainable development in international fora, including the
ILO, the Asia-Europe Meeting, the United Nations Environment
Programme and under multilateral environmental agreements;

(b) exchange of information and experience with regard to methodologies
and indicators for impact assessments on trade sustainability;

(c) the impact of labour and environment laws, regulations, norms and
standards, on trade or investment as well as the impact of trade or
investment rules on labour and environment, including on_ the
development of strategies and policies on sustainable development;

(d) sharing experience on promoting the ratification and implementation of
fundamental, priority and other up-to-date ILO conventions and
multilateral environmental agreements of relevance to trade;

EU/VN/en 229

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(I)

(m)

trade-related aspects of the ILO Decent Work Agenda, in particular the
inter-linkage between trade and full and productive employment for all,
including youth, women and people with disabilities, labour market
adjustment, core and other international labour standards, labour
statistics, human resources development and lifelong learning, social
protection for all including for vulnerable and disadvantaged groups,
such as migrant workers, women, youth and people with disabilities, and
social inclusion, social dialogue and gender equality;

trade-related aspects of multilateral environmental agreements, including
customs cooperation;

trade-related aspects of the current and future international climate
change regime, including means to promote low-carbon technologies and
energy efficiency;

sharing information and experience about certification and labelling
schemes, including eco-labelling;

promoting corporate social responsibility and accountability, including
with regard to the internationally agreed instruments that have been
endorsed or are supported by each Party;

trade-related measures to promote the conservation and sustainable use of
biological diversity, including the mapping, assessment and valuation of
ecosystems and their services, and to combat illegal international trade in
wildlife;

trade-related measures to promote the conservation and sustainable
management of forests with a view to reducing deforestation and illegal

logging;

trade-related measures to promote sustainable fishing practices and trade
in sustainably managed fish products; and

sharing information and experience about trade-related aspects
concerning the definition and implementation of green growth strategies
and policies, including but not limited to sustainable production and
consumption, climate change mitigation and adaptation, and
environmentally sound technology.

EU/VN/en 230

2. The Parties shall share information and experience for the purposes of
developing and implementing cooperation and capacity-building activities on
trade and sustainable development.

3. In accordance with Chapter 16 (Cooperation and Capacity Building), the
Parties may work together in the areas referred to in paragraph | by means of,
inter alia:

(a) workshops, seminars, training and dialogues to share knowledge,
experiences and best practices;

(b) studies; and
(c) technical assistance and capacity building, as appropriate.

The Parties may agree other forms of cooperation.

ARTICLE 13.15
Institutional Provisions

1. Each Party shall designate a contact point within its administration for
the purposes of implementing this Chapter.

2. The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development established
pursuant to Article 17.2 (Specialised Committees) shall comprise senior
officials from the relevant administrations of each Party or officials they
designate.

3. The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall meet within
the first year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter
as necessary, to review the implementation of this Chapter, including
cooperation under Article 13.14 (Working Together on Trade and Sustainable
Development). The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall
establish its own rules of procedure, and reach its conclusions by mutual
agreement.

4. Each Party shall convene a new or consult an existing domestic advisory
group or groups on sustainable development with the task of advising on the
implementation of this Chapter. Each Party shall decide on its domestic

EU/VN/en 231

procedures for the establishment of its domestic advisory group or groups and
the appointment of the members of such group or groups. The group or groups
shall comprise independent representative organisations, ensuring a balanced
representation of economic, social and environmental stakeholders, including,
among others, employers' and workers' organisations, business groups, and
environmental organisations. Each domestic advisory group may, on its own
initiative, submit views or recommendations to its respective Party on the
implementation of this Chapter.

5. Members of the domestic advisory group or groups of each Party shall
meet in a joint forum to conduct a dialogue on sustainable development
aspects of trade relations between the Parties. By joint agreement, domestic
advisory groups of both Parties may involve other stakeholders in meetings of
the joint forum. The forum shall be based on a balanced representation of
economic, social and environmental stakeholders. The report of each meeting
of the joint forum shall be submitted to the Committee on Trade and
Sustainable Development and thereafter be made publicly available.

6. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the joint forum shall meet once a year
and in conjunction with the meetings of the Committee on Trade and
Sustainable Development. On such occasions, the Parties shall present to the
joint forum an update on the implementation of this Chapter. The Parties shall
agree on the operation of the joint forum no later than one year after the date
of entry into force of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 13.16
Government Consultations

1. In the event of disagreement on any matter covered under this Chapter,
the Parties shall only have recourse to the procedures established under this
Article and Article 13.17 (Panel of Experts). Except as otherwise provided for
in this Chapter, Chapter 15 (Dispute Settlement) and its Annex 15-C
(Mediation Mechanism) do not apply to this Chapter. Annex 15-A (Rules of
Procedure) applies mutatis mutandis in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article
13.17 (Panel of Experts).

2. A Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding any

EU/VN/en 232

matter arising under this Chapter by delivering a written request to the contact
point of the other Party. The request shall present the matter clearly,
identifying the problem at issue and providing a brief summary of the claims
under this Chapter, including the indication of the relevant provisions thereof
and an explanation of how the problem affects the objectives of this Chapter,
as well as any other information the Party deems relevant. Consultations shall
start promptly after a Party delivers a request for consultations.

3. The Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually satisfactory
resolution of the matter. During consultations, special attention shall be given
to the particular problems and interests of the Party which is a developing
country. Where relevant, the Parties shall give due consideration to the
activities of the ILO or relevant multilateral environmental organisations or
bodies and may, by mutual agreement, seek advice from these organisations or
bodies, or any other body or person they deem appropriate, in order to fully
examine the matter.

4. If a Party considers that the matter needs further discussion that Party
may, by delivering a written request to the contact point of the other Party,
request that the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development be
convened to consider the matter. The Committee on Trade and Sustainable
Development shall convene promptly and endeavour to agree on a resolution
of the matter.

5. Where appropriate, the Committee on Trade and Sustainable
Development may seek the advice of the domestic advisory group or groups of
either Party or both Parties or other expert assistance, with the objective of
facilitating its analysis.

6. Any resolution reached by the Parties on the matter shall be made
publicly available, unless otherwise mutually decided.

ARTICLE 13.17
Panel of Experts

1. If the matter has not been satisfactorily resolved by the Committee on
Trade and Sustainable Development within 120 days, or a longer period

EU/VN/en 233

agreed by both Parties, after the delivery of a request for consultations under
Article 13.16 (Government Consultations), a Party may request, by delivering
a written request to the contact point of the other Party, that a Panel of Experts
be convened to examine that matter.

2. The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall, after the
entry into force of this Agreement, establish rules of procedures for the Panel
of Experts for any procedural matter that 1s not covered in this Article. Unless
the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development agrees otherwise,
pending the establishment of such rules of procedures, the Rules of Procedure
set out in Annex 15-A (Rules of Procedure) shall apply mutatis mutandis,
taking into account the nature of the work of the Panel of Experts.

3. The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall, at its first
meeting after the entry into force of this Agreement, establish a list of at least
fifteen individuals who are willing and able to serve on the Panel of Experts.
This list shall be composed of three sub-lists: one sub-list for each Party and
one sub-list of individuals who are not nationals of either Party and who shall
act as chairperson of the Panel of Experts. Each Party shall propose for its sub-
list at least five individuals to serve as experts. The Parties shall also select at
least five individuals for the sub-list of chairpersons. At its meetings, the
Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall review the list and
ensure that it is maintained at least at the level of fifteen individuals.

4. The list referred to in paragraph 3 shall comprise individuals with
specialised knowledge of, or expertise in, labour or environmental law, issues
addressed in this Chapter, or the resolution of disputes arising under
international agreements. They shall be independent, serve in their individual
capacities and not take instructions from any organisation or government with
regard to issues related to the matter at stake, or be affiliated with the
government of any Party. The principles set out in Annex 15-B (Code of
Conduct for Arbitrators and Mediators) shall apply to experts mutatis
mutandis, taking into account the nature of their work.

5. A Panel of Experts shall be composed of three members, unless
otherwise agreed by the Parties. Within 30 days of the date of receipt by the
responding Party of the request for the establishment of a Panel of Experts, the
Parties shall consult in order to reach an agreement on its composition. In the
event that the Parties are unable to agree on the composition of the Panel of

EU/VN/en 234

Experts within this time frame, they shall select the chairperson from the
relevant sub-list referred to in paragraph 3, by mutual agreement or, in the
event that they cannot agree within another seven days, by lot. Each Party
shall select one expert complying with the requirements referred to in
paragraph 4 within 14 days after the end of the 30-day period. The Parties may
agree on any other expert complying with the requirements referred to in
paragraph 4 to serve on the Panel of Experts. In the event that the composition
of the Panel of Experts has not been completed within the time frame of 44
days from the date of receipt by the responding Party of the request for the
establishment of a Panel of Experts, the remaining expert or experts shall be
selected within seven days by lot from the sub-list or sub-lists referred to in
paragraph 3 among the individuals proposed by the Party or Parties who has or
have not completed the procedure. In the event that the list referred to in
paragraph 3 has not yet been established, the experts shall be selected by lot
from the individuals who have been formally proposed by both Parties or, in
the event that only one Party has made its proposal, by one of the Parties. The
date of establishment of the Panel of Experts shall be the date on which the
last of the three experts is selected.

6. Unless the Parties agree otherwise within seven days from the date of
establishment of the Panel of Experts, the terms of reference of the Panel of
Experts shall be:

"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of the Trade and
Sustainable Development Chapter, the matter referred to in the request for the
establishment of the Panel of Experts, and to issue reports, in accordance with
paragraph 8 of this Article, making recommendations for the solution of the
matter.".

7. In matters relating to the respect of the multilateral agreements as set out
in Article 13.4 (Multilateral Labour Standards and Agreements) and Article
13.5 (Multilateral Environmental Agreements), the Panel should seek
information and advice from the ILO or bodies of the relevant multilateral
environmental agreement. Any information obtained under this paragraph
shall be provided to both Parties for their comments.

8. The Panel of Experts shall issue an interim and a final report to the
Parties. These reports shall set out the findings of facts, the applicability of the
relevant provisions and the basic rationale behind any findings and

EU/VN/en 235

recommendations. The Panel of Experts shall issue the interim report to the
Parties not later than 90 days from the date of its establishment. Any Party
may submit written comments to the Panel of Experts on the interim report
within 45 days of its issuance. After considering any such written comments,
the Panel of Experts may modify the report and make any further examination
it considers appropriate. The Panel of Experts shall issue the final report to the
Parties no later than 150 days from the date of its establishment. Where it
considers that the deadlines set in this paragraph cannot be met, the
chairperson of the Panel of Experts shall notify the Parties in writing, stating
the reasons for the delay and the date on which the Panel of Experts plans to
issue its interim or final report. The Panel of Experts shall issue the final
report no later than 180 days after the date of its establishment, unless the
Parties agree otherwise. This final report shall be made publicly available
unless otherwise mutually decided.

9. The Parties shall discuss appropriate actions or measures to be
implemented taking into account the final report of the Panel of Experts and
the recommendations therein. The Party concerned shall inform its domestic
advisory group or groups and the other Party of its decisions on any actions or
measures to be implemented no later than 90 days, or a longer period of time
mutually agreed by the Parties, after the final report has been submitted to the
Parties. The follow-up to the implementation of such actions or measures shall
be monitored by the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development. The
domestic advisory group or groups and the joint forum may submit
observations to the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development in this
regard.

CHAPTER 14

TRANSPARENCY

ARTICLE 14.1
Objective and Scope

Recognising the impact that regulatory environment and procedures may have

EU/VN/en 236

on trade and investment, each Party shall promote a predictable regulatory
environment and efficient procedures for economic operators, especially small
and medium-sized enterprises.

ARTICLE 14.2

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

"interested person" means any natural or legal person that may be
affected by a measure of general application; and

"measure of general application" means laws, regulations, judicial
decisions, procedures and administrative rulings of general application
that may have an impact on any matter covered by this Agreement.

ARTICLE 14.3
Publication
Each Party shall ensure that a measure of general application:

is published promptly by means of an officially designated medium,
including, where possible, electronic means, in such a manner as to
enable governments and interested persons to become acquainted with it;
and

allows for a sufficient period of time between publication and entry into
force of that measure, except where this is not possible for reasons of
urgency.

Each Party shall:

endeavour to publish at an early appropriate stage any proposal to adopt
or amend any measure of general application, including, upon request, an
explanation of the objective of, and rationale for, the proposal;

provide reasonable opportunities for interested persons to comment on

EU/VN/en 237

any proposal to adopt or amend any measure of general application,
allowing, in particular, for sufficient time for such opportunities, except
where this is not possible for reasons of urgency; and

(c) endeavour to take into consideration the comments received from
interested persons with respect to any proposal to adopt or amend any
measure of general application.

ARTICLE 14.4
Enquiries and Contact Points

1. Each Party shall, upon the entry into force of this Agreement, designate a
contact point in order to ensure the effective implementation of this
Agreement and to facilitate communication between the Parties on any matter
covered by this Agreement.

2. Upon request of the other Party, the contact points shall identify the
office or official responsible for the matter and assist, as necessary, in
facilitating communication with the requesting Party.

3. Each Party shall, within its available resources, establish or maintain
appropriate mechanisms, including those provided for in other Chapters of this
Agreement, for responding to enquiries from any interested person regarding
any measure of general application which is proposed or in force, and how it
would be applied. Enquiries may be addressed through contact points
designated under paragraph 1 or any other mechanism as appropriate, unless a
specific mechanism is established in this Agreement.

4. Each Party shall provide for mechanisms available to interested persons
seeking a solution to problems that have arisen from the application of a
measure of general application under this Agreement.

5. The Parties recognise that responses provided pursuant to this Article
may be neither definitive nor legally binding, but for information purposes
only.

6. Each Party shall provide, upon request, an explanation of the objective
of, and rationale for measures of general application.

EU/VN/en 238

7. Upon request of a Party, the other Party shall promptly provide
information and respond to questions pertaining to any measure or proposed
measure of general application that the requesting Party considers might
materially affect the operation of this Agreement, regardless of whether the
requesting Party has been previously notified of that measure.

ARTICLE 14.5
Administration of Measures of General Application

Each Party shall administer in a uniform, objective, impartial and reasonable
manner all measures of general application. Each Party, in applying such
measures to particular persons, goods or services of the other Party, shall:

(a) endeavour to provide interested persons that are directly affected by
proceedings, with reasonable notice, in accordance with its domestic
procedures, when proceedings are initiated, including a description of the
nature of the proceedings, a statement of the legal authority under which
the proceedings are initiated and a general description of any issues in
question;

(b) afford such interested persons a reasonable opportunity to present facts
and arguments in support of their positions prior to any final
administrative action when time, the nature of the proceedings and the
public interest permit; and

(c) ensure that its procedures are based on, and in accordance with, its
domestic law.

ARTICLE 14.6
Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain, in accordance with its domestic
law, judicial, arbitral or administrative tribunals or procedures for the purposes
of the prompt review and, where warranted, correction of administrative
action relating to matters covered by this Agreement. Those tribunals and

EU/VN/en 239

procedures shall be impartial and independent of the office or authority
entrusted with administrative enforcement, and shall not have any substantial
interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, in any such tribunals or procedures, the
parties to the proceedings are provided with the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions;
and

(b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record or, where
required by its domestic law, the record compiled by the administrative
authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided
for in its domestic law, that the decision referred to in subparagraph 2(b) 1s
implemented by, and governs the practice of, the office or authority with
respect to the administrative action at issue.

ARTICLE 14.7
Good Regulatory Practice and Administrative Behaviour

1. The Parties agree to cooperate in promoting regulatory quality and
performance, including through exchange of information and best practices on
their respective regulatory reform processes and regulatory impact
assessments.

2. The Parties subscribe to the principles of good administrative behaviour
and agree to cooperate in promoting such principles, including through the
exchange of information and best practices.

ARTICLE 14.8
Specific Rules

This Chapter applies without prejudice to any specific rules established in
other Chapters of this Agreement.

EU/VN/en 240

CHAPTER 15

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

SECTION A

OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE

ARTICLE 15.1
Objective

The objective of this Chapter is to establish an effective and efficient
mechanism for avoiding and settling any dispute between the Parties regarding
the interpretation and application of this Agreement with a view to arriving at
a mutually agreed solution.

ARTICLE 15.2
Scope

This Chapter applies with respect to the avoidance and settlement of any
dispute between the Parties regarding the interpretation or application of the
provisions of this Agreement, except as otherwise provided for in this
Agreement.

EU/VN/en 241

SECTION B

CONSULTATIONS AND MEDIATION

ARTICLE 15.3
Consultations

1. The Parties shall endeavour to resolve any dispute referred to in Article
15.2 (Scope) by entering into consultations in good faith with the aim of
reaching a mutually agreed solution.

2. A Party shall seek consultations by means of a written request to the
other Party, copied to the Trade Committee established pursuant to Article
17.1 (Trade Committee), identifying the measure at issue and the relevant
provisions of this Agreement.

3. Consultations shall be held within 30 days of the date of receipt of the
request referred to in paragraph 2 and take place, unless the Parties agree
otherwise, in the territory of the Party to which the request is made. The
consultations shall be deemed concluded within 45 days of the date of receipt
of the request, unless both Parties agree to continue consultations.
Consultations, in particular all information disclosed and positions taken by
the Parties, shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of either
Party in any further proceedings.

4. Consultations on matters of urgency, including those matters involving
perishable goods, seasonal goods or seasonal services, shall be held within 15
days of the date of receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 2. The
consultations shall be deemed concluded within 20 days of the date of receipt
of the request referred to in paragraph 2, unless both Parties agree to continue
consultations.

5. The Party that sought consultations may have recourse to Article 15.5
(Initiation of the Arbitration Procedure) if:

(a) the other Party does not respond to the request for consultations within 15
days of the date of its receipt;

EU/VN/en 242

(b) the consultations are not held within the timeframes provided for in
paragraphs 3 or 4;

(c) the Parties agree not to have consultations; or

(d) the consultations have been concluded without a mutually agreed
solution.

6. During consultations each Party shall provide sufficient factual
information for an examination of the manner in which the measure at issue
could affect the operation and application of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 15.4
Mediation Mechanism

The Parties may at any time agree to enter into a mediation procedure pursuant
to Annex 15-C (Mediation Mechanism) with respect to any measure adversely
affecting trade or liberalisation of investment between the Parties.

SECTION C

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES

SUB-SECTION 1

ARBITRATION PROCEDURE

ARTICLE 15.5
Initiation of the Arbitration Procedure

1. If the Parties fail to resolve the dispute through consultations as provided
for in Article 15.3 (Consultations), the Party that sought consultations may
request the establishment of an arbitration panel.

EU/VN/en 243

2. The request for the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be made in
writing to the other Party, a copy of which shall be submitted to the Trade
Committee. The complaining Party shall identify the measure at issue in its
request, and explain how that measure is inconsistent with the provisions of
this Agreement in such a manner as to clearly present the legal basis for the
complaint.

ARTICLE 15.6
Terms of Reference of the Arbitration Panel

Unless the Parties agree otherwise within 10 days of the date of the selection
of the arbitrators, the terms of reference of the arbitration panel shall be:

"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement cited by
the Parties, the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of an
arbitration panel pursuant to Article 15.5 (Initiation of the Arbitration
Procedure), to rule on the conformity of the measure in question with the
provisions referred to in Article 15.2 (Scope), and to set out in its report
findings of fact, the applicability of the relevant provisions and the basic
rationale for any findings and recommendations, in accordance with Articles
15.10 (Interim Report) and 15.11 (Final Report).".

ARTICLE 15.7
Establishment of the Arbitration Panel
1. An arbitration panel shall be composed of three arbitrators.

2. Within 10 days of the date of receipt by the Party complained against of
the request for the establishment of an arbitration panel, the Parties shall
consult in order to agree on the composition of the arbitration panel.

3. If the Parties do not agree on the composition of the arbitration panel
within the time frame provided for in paragraph 2, each Party may appoint an
arbitrator from the sub-list of that Party established under Article 15.23 (List
of Arbitrators) within 10 days from the expiry of the time frame provided for

EU/VN/en 244

in paragraph 2. If a Party fails to appoint an arbitrator from its sub-list the
arbitrator shall, upon request of the other Party, be selected by lot by the chair
of the Trade Committee, or the chair's delegate, from the sub-list of that Party
established under Article 15.23 (List of Arbitrators).

4. If the Parties do not agree on the chairperson of the arbitration panel
within the time frame provided for in paragraph 2 the chair of the Trade
Committee, or the chair's delegate, shall select by lot, upon request of a Party,
the chairperson of the arbitration panel from the sub-list of chairpersons
established under Article 15.23 (List of Arbitrators).

5. The chair of the Trade Committee, or the chair's delegate, shall select the
arbitrators within five days of the request referred to in paragraph 3 or 4.

6. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on
which the three selected arbitrators have notified the Parties of the acceptance
of their appointment in accordance with Annex 15-A (Rules of Procedure).

7. If any of the lists provided for in Article 15.23 (List of Arbitrators) have
not been established or do not contain sufficient names when a request is made
pursuant to paragraph 3 or 4, the arbitrators shall be selected by lot from
among the individuals who have been formally proposed by both Parties, or by
a Party in the event that only one Party has made a proposal.

ARTICLE 15.8
Dispute Settlement Proceedings of the Arbitration Panel

1. The rules and procedures set out in this Article, Annexes 15-A (Rules of
Procedure) and 15-B (Code of Conduct for Arbitrators and Mediators) shall
govern the dispute settlement proceedings of an arbitration panel.

2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, they shall meet the arbitration panel
within 10 days of its establishment in order to determine all matters that the
Parties or the arbitration panel deem appropriate, including the timetable of
the proceedings and the remuneration and expenses of the arbitrators in
accordance with Annex 15-A (Rules of Procedure). Arbitrators and
representatives of the Parties may take part in this meeting via telephone or
video conference.

EU/VN/en 245

3. The venue of the hearing shall be decided by mutual consent of the
Parties. If the Parties do not agree on the venue of the hearing, it shall be held
in Brussels if the complaining Party is Viet Nam and in Ha Noi if the
complaining Party is the Union.

4. Any hearing shall be open to the public unless otherwise provided for in
Annex 15-A (Rules of Procedure).

5. In accordance with Annex 15-A (Rules of Procedure), the Parties shall be
given the opportunity to attend any of the presentations, statements, arguments
or rebuttals in the proceedings. Any information or written submission
submitted to the arbitration panel by a Party, including any comments on the
descriptive part of the interim report, responses to questions by the arbitration
panel and comments by a Party on those responses, shall be made available to
the other Party.

6. Unless the Parties agree otherwise within three days of the date of
establishment of the arbitration panel, the arbitration panel may receive, in
accordance with Annex 15-A (Rules of Procedure), unsolicited written
submissions (amicus curiae submissions) from a natural or legal person
established in the territory of a Party.

7. For its internal deliberations, the arbitration panel shall meet in closed
session where only arbitrators take part. The arbitration panel may permit its
assistants to be present at its deliberations. The deliberations of the arbitration
panel and the documents submitted to it shall be kept confidential.

ARTICLE 15.9
Preliminary Ruling on Urgency

If a Party so requests, the arbitration panel shall give a preliminary ruling
within 10 days of its establishment on whether it deems the case to be urgent.

EU/VN/en 246

ARTICLE 15.10
Interim Report

1. The arbitration panel shall issue an interim report to the Parties setting
out the findings of fact, the applicability of relevant provisions and the basic
rationale for any findings and recommendations, no later than 90 days from
the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. When it considers that this
deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the arbitration panel shall notify the
Parties and the Trade Committee in writing, stating the reasons for the delay
and the date on which the arbitration panel plans to issue its interim report.
The arbitration panel shall, under no circumstances, issue the interim report
later than 120 days after the date of establishment of the arbitration panel.

2. A Party may submit a written request, including comments, to the
arbitration panel to review precise aspects of the interim report within 14 days
of its notification.

3. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods or
seasonal goods or services, the arbitration panel shall make every effort to
issue its interim report within 45 days and, in any case, no later than 60 days
after the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. A Party may submit a
written request, including comments, to the arbitration panel to review precise
aspects of the interim report, within seven days of the notification of the
interim report.

4. After considering any written requests, including comments, by the
Parties on the interim report, the arbitration panel may modify its report and
make any further examination that it considers appropriate.

ARTICLE 15.11
Final Report

1. The arbitration panel shall issue its final report to the Parties and to the
Trade Committee within 120 days of the date of establishment of the
arbitration panel. When it considers that this deadline cannot be met, the
chairperson of the arbitration panel shall notify the Parties and the Trade
Committee in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which

EU/VN/en 247

the arbitration panel plans to issue its final report. The arbitration panel shall,
under no circumstances, issue the final report later than 150 days from the date
of establishment of the arbitration panel.

2. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods or
seasonal goods or services, the arbitration panel shall make every effort to
issue its final report within 60 days of the date of its establishment. The
arbitration panel shall, under no circumstances issue the final report later than
75 days from the date of establishment of the arbitration panel.

3. The final report shall include a sufficient discussion of the arguments
made at the interim review stage, and shall clearly address the comments by
the Parties.

SUB-SECTION 2

COMPLIANCE

ARTICLE 15.12
Compliance with the Final Report

The Party complained against shall take any measure necessary to comply
promptly and in good faith with the final report.

ARTICLE 15.13
Reasonable Period of Time for Compliance

1. If immediate compliance is not possible, the Parties shall endeavour to
mutually agree on the period of time to comply with the final report. In such a
case, the Party complained against shall, no later than 30 days after the receipt
of the final report, notify the complaining Party and the Trade Committee of
the time it will require for compliance (hereinafter referred to as the
"reasonable period of time").

EU/VN/en 248

2. If there is disagreement between the Parties on the reasonable period of
time to comply with the final report, the complaining Party shall, within 20
days of the receipt of the notification made in accordance with paragraph | by
the Party complained against, request, in writing, the arbitration panel
established pursuant to Article 15.7 (Establishment of the Arbitration Panel)
(hereinafter referred to as the "original arbitration panel") to determine the
length of the reasonable period of time. That request shall be notified to the
Party complained against, with a copy thereof sent to the Trade Committee.

3. The arbitration panel shall notify its ruling on the reasonable period of
time to the Parties and to the Trade Committee within 20 days of the date of
the submission of the request referred to in paragraph 2.

4. The Party complained against shall inform, in writing, the complaining
Party of its progress to comply with the final report at least 30 days before the
expiry of the reasonable period of time.

5. The Parties may agree to extend the reasonable period of time.

ARTICLE 15.14
Review of Measure Taken to Comply with the Final Report

1. The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party and the
Trade Committee before the end of the reasonable period of time of any
measure that it has taken to comply with the final report.

2. If the Parties disagree on the existence or the consistency of any measure
taken to comply with the provisions referred to in Article 15.2 (Scope) and
notified under paragraph 1, the complaining Party may request, in writing, the
original arbitration panel to rule on the matter. The request shall be notified to
the Party complained against, with a copy thereof sent to the Trade
Committee. The complaining Party shall identify in its request the specific
measure at issue, and explain how such measure is inconsistent with the
provisions referred to in Article 15.2 (Scope) in a manner sufficient to clearly
present the legal basis for the complaint.

3. The arbitration panel shall notify its ruling to the Parties and to the Trade
Committee within 45 days of the date of the submission of the request referred

EU/VN/en 249

to in paragraph 2.

ARTICLE 15.15
Temporary Remedies in Case of Non-Compliance

1. If the Party complained against fails to notify the complaining Party and
the Trade Committee of any measure taken to comply with the final report
before the expiry of the reasonable period of time, or if the arbitration panel
rules that no measure to comply with has been taken or that the measure
notified under paragraph 1 of Article 15.14 (Review of Measure Taken to
Comply with the Final Report) is inconsistent with that Party's obligations
under the provisions referred to in Article 15.2 (Scope), the Party complained
against shall, if so requested by the complaining Party and after consultations
with that Party, present an offer for compensation.

2. If the complaining Party decides not to request an offer for compensation
or, in case such request is made, if no agreement on compensation is reached
within 30 days of the end of the reasonable period of time or of the issuance of
the arbitration panel ruling under Article 15.14 (Review of Measure Taken to
Comply with the Final Report) that no measure to comply has been taken or
that a measure taken is inconsistent with the provisions referred to in
Article 15.2 (Scope), the complaining Party shall be entitled, upon notification
to the other Party and to the Trade Committee, to suspend obligations arising
from any provision referred to in Article 15.2 (Scope) at a level equivalent to
the nullification or impairment caused by the violation. The notification shall
specify the level of suspension of obligations. The complaining Party may
implement the suspension at any moment after the expiry of 10 days from the
date of receipt of the notification by the Party complained against, unless the
Party complained against has requested arbitration under paragraph 3 of this
Article.

3. If the Party complained against considers that the level of suspension of
obligations is not equivalent to the nullification or impairment caused by the
violation, it may request, in writing, the original arbitration panel to rule on
the matter. That request shall be notified to the complaining Party and copied
to the Trade Committee before the expiry of the period of 10 days referred to
in paragraph 2. The original arbitration panel shall notify its ruling on the level

EU/VN/en 250

of the suspension of obligations to the Parties and to the Trade Committee
within 30 days of the date of the submission of the request. Obligations shall
not be suspended until the original arbitration panel has notified its ruling, and
any suspension shall be consistent with that ruling.

4. The suspension of obligations and the compensation shall be temporary
and shall not be applied after:

(a) the Parties have reached a mutually agreed solution pursuant to Article
15.19 (Mutually Agreed Solution);

(b) the Parties have agreed that the measure notified under paragraph 1 of
Article 15.14 (Review of Measure Taken to Comply with the Final
Report) brings the Party complained against into conformity with the
provisions referred to in Article 15.2 (Scope); or

(c) any measure found to be inconsistent with the provisions referred to in
Article 15.2 (Scope) has been withdrawn or amended so as to bring it into
conformity with those provisions, as ruled under paragraph 3 of Article
15.14 (Review of Measure Taken to Comply with the Final Report).

ARTICLE 15.16

Review of Measure Taken to Comply
After the Adoption of Temporary Remedies for Non-Compliance

1. The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party and the
Trade Committee of any measure it has taken to comply with the final report
of the arbitration panel following the suspension of obligations or following
the application of compensation, as the case may be. With the exception of
cases referred to in paragraph 2, the complaining Party shall terminate the
suspension of obligations within 30 days of the date of the receipt of the
notification. In the event that compensation has been applied, and with the
exception of cases referred to in paragraph 2, the Party complained against
may terminate the application of such compensation within 30 days from its
notification that it has complied with the final report of the arbitration panel.

2. If the Parties do not agree on whether the notified measure brings the
Party complained against into conformity with the provisions referred to in

EU/VN/en 251

Article 15.2 (Scope), within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notification,
the complaining Party shall request, in writing, the original arbitration panel to
rule on the matter. That request shall be notified to the Party complained
against, with a copy thereof sent to the Trade Committee.

3. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be notified to the Parties and to
the Trade Committee within 45 days of the date of the submission of the
request. If the arbitration panel rules that the notified measure is in conformity
with the provisions referred to in Article 15.2 (Scope), the suspension of
obligations or compensation, as the case may be, shall be terminated. Where
relevant, the level of suspension of obligations or of compensation shall be
adapted in light of the ruling of the arbitration panel.

SUB-SECTION 3
COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 15.17
Replacement of Arbitrators

If during arbitration proceedings the original arbitration panel, or some of its
members, are unable to participate, withdraw or need to be replaced because
the member does not comply with the requirements of the Code of Conduct in
Annex 15-B (Code of Conduct for Arbitrators and Mediators), the procedure
set out in Article 15.7 (Establishment of the Arbitration Panel) applies. The
time limit for the notification of the reports and rulings, as the case may be,
shall be extended by 20 days.

ARTICLE 15.18
Suspension and Termination of Arbitration Proceedings

1. The arbitration panel shall, at the request of both Parties, suspend its
work at any time for a period agreed by the Parties not exceeding 12
consecutive months. It shall resume its work before the end of that suspension
period at the written request of both Parties. The Parties shall inform the Trade

EU/VN/en 252

Committee accordingly. The arbitration panel may also resume its work at the
end of the suspension period at the written request of either Party. The
requesting Party shall inform the Trade Committee and the other Party,
accordingly. If a Party does not request the resumption of the arbitration
panel's work at the expiry of the suspension period, the authority of the
arbitration panel shall lapse and the proceedings shall be terminated. In the
event of a suspension of the work of the arbitration panel, the time frames set
out in the relevant provisions of this Chapter shall be extended by the same
period of time for which the work was suspended. The suspension and
termination of the arbitration panel's work are without prejudice to the rights
of either Party in other proceedings subject to Article 15.24 (Choice of
Forum).

2. The Parties may agree to terminate the proceedings of the arbitration
panel by jointly notifying such agreement to the chairperson of the arbitration
panel and the Trade Committee at any time before the issuance of the final
report of the arbitration panel.

ARTICLE 15.19
Mutually Agreed Solution

The Parties may reach a mutually agreed solution to a dispute under this
Chapter at any time. They shall jointly notify the Trade Committee and the
chairperson of the arbitration panel, where applicable, of any such solution. If
the solution requires approval pursuant to the relevant domestic procedures of
either Party, the notification shall refer to that requirement and the dispute
settlement procedure shall be suspended. If such approval is not required, or if
the completion of any such domestic procedures is notified, the dispute
settlement procedure shall be terminated.

ARTICLE 15.20
Information and Technical Advice

At the request of a Party, or upon its own initiative, the arbitration panel may
request any information it deems appropriate for the proceedings of the

EU/VN/en 253

arbitration panel from any source, including the Parties involved in the
dispute. The arbitration panel has also the right to seek the opinion of experts,
as 1t deems appropriate. The arbitration panel shall consult the Parties before
choosing such experts. Any information obtained under this Article must be
disclosed and submitted to the Parties for their comments within the time
frame set by the arbitration panel.

ARTICLE 15.21
Rules of Interpretation

The arbitration panel shall interpret the provisions referred to in Article 15.2
(Scope) in accordance with customary rules of interpretation of public
international law, including those codified in the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties, done at Vienna on 23 May 1969. The arbitration panel shall
also take into account relevant interpretations in reports of panels and of the
Appellate Body adopted by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body under Annex 2
of the WTO Agreement. The reports and rulings of the arbitration panel shall
not add to or diminish the rights and obligations of the Parties provided for in
this Agreement.

ARTICLE 15.22
Decisions and Rulings of the Arbitration Panel

1. The arbitration panel shall make every effort to take any decision by
consensus. In the event that a decision cannot be reached by consensus, the
matter at issue shall be decided by majority vote. Dissenting opinions of
arbitrators shall in no case be disclosed.

2. The reports and rulings of the arbitration panel shall be accepted
unconditionally by the Parties. They shall not create any rights or obligations
with respect to natural or legal persons. The reports and rulings shall set out
the findings of fact, the applicability of the relevant provisions referred to in
Article 15.2 (Scope) and the basic rationale behind any findings and
conclusions. The Trade Committee shall make the reports and rulings of the
arbitration panel publicly available in their entirety within 10 days of their

EU/VN/en 254

issuance, unless it decides not to do so in order to protect confidential
information.

SECTION D

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 15.23
List of Arbitrators

1. The Trade Committee shall, no later than six months after the date of
entry into force of this Agreement, establish a list of at least 15 individuals
who are willing and able to serve as arbitrators. The list shall be composed of
three sub-lists:

(a) one sub-list for the Union;
(b) one sub-list for Viet Nam; and

(c) one sub-list of individuals who are not nationals of either Party and do
not have permanent residence in either Party and who shall act as
chairperson of the arbitration panel.

2 Each sub-list shall include at least five individuals. The Trade Committee
shall ensure that the list is always maintained at this minimum number of
individuals.

3. Arbitrators shall have demonstrated expertise and experience of law and
international trade. They shall be independent, serve in their individual
capacities and not take instructions from any organisation or government, or
be affiliated with the government of any of the Parties, and shall comply with
the Code of Conduct in Annex 15-B (Code of Conduct for Arbitrators and
Mediators).

4. The Trade Committee may establish an additional list of 10 individuals
with demonstrated expertise and experience in specific sectors covered by this
Agreement. Subject to the agreement of the Parties, such an additional list

EU/VN/en 255

shall be used to compose the arbitration panel in accordance with the
procedure set out in Article 15.7 (Establishment of the Arbitration Panel).

ARTICLE 15.24
Choice of Forum

1. Recourse to the dispute settlement procedure under this Chapter shall be
without prejudice to any action in the WTO framework, including dispute
settlement action, or under any other international agreement to which both
Parties are party.

2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, a Party shall not, for a particular
measure, seek redress for the breach of a substantially equivalent obligation
under this Agreement and under the WTO Agreement or under any other
international agreement to which both Parties are party in the relevant fora.
Once dispute settlement proceedings have been initiated, a Party shall not
bring a claim seeking redress for the breach of the substantially equivalent
obligation under the other agreement to the other forum, unless the forum
selected first fails for procedural or jurisdictional reasons to make findings on
the claim seeking redress to that obligation.

3. For the purposes of this Article:

(a) dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement are deemed to
be initiated by a Party's request for the establishment of a panel under
Article 6 of the WTO Understanding on Rules and Procedures
Governing the Settlement of Disputes;

(b) dispute settlement proceedings under this Chapter are deemed to be
initiated by a Party's request for the establishment of an arbitration panel
under paragraph 1 of Article 15.5 (Initiation of the Arbitration
Procedure);

(c) dispute settlement proceedings under any other international agreement
are deemed to be initiated in accordance with that agreement.

4. Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude a Party from implementing the
suspension of obligations authorised by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body.

EU/VN/en 256

The WTO Agreement shall not be invoked to preclude a Party from
suspending obligations in accordance with this Chapter.

ARTICLE 15.25
Time Limits

1. All time limits laid down in this Chapter, including the limits for the
arbitration panels to notify their reports and rulings, shall be counted in
calendar days from the day following the act or fact to which they refer, unless
otherwise specified.

2. Any time limit referred to in this Chapter may be modified by mutual
agreement of the Parties to the dispute. The arbitration panel may at any time
propose to the Parties to modify any time limit referred to in this Chapter,
stating the reasons for the proposal.

ARTICLE 15.26
Review and Modification

The Trade Committee may decide to review and modify Annexes 15-A (Rules
of Procedure), 15-B (Code of Conduct for Arbitrators and Mediators) and 15-
C (Mediation Mechanism).

CHAPTER 16

COOPERATION AND CAPACITY BUILDING

ARTICLE 16.1
Objectives and Scope

1. The Parties affirm the importance of cooperation and capacity building
for the efficient implementation of this Agreement, which supports the

EU/VN/en 257

continued expansion of and creates new opportunities for trade and investment
between them.

2. The Parties commit to deepen cooperation in areas of mutual interest
taking into consideration the different levels of development between the
Union and Viet Nam. That cooperation shall foster sustainable development in
all its dimensions, including sustainable growth and the reduction of poverty.

3. This Chapter applies to all provisions on cooperation of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 16.2
Areas and Means of Cooperation

1. The Parties acknowledge that cooperation shall be carried out within the
existing legal and institutional framework and according to the rules and
procedures governing the relations between the Parties.

2. To achieve the objectives referred to in Article 16.1 (Objectives and
Scope), the Parties attach particular importance to cooperating in the following
areas:

(a) regional cooperation and integration;

(b) trade facilitation;

(c) trade policy and regulations;

(d) trade-related aspects of agriculture, fishery and forestry;

(e) sustainable development, in particular in its environmental and labour
dimensions;

(f) small and medium-sized enterprises;
(g) other areas identified under specific Chapters of this Agreement; and
(h) other areas of mutual interest related to this Agreement.

3. Cooperation between the Parties shall primarily be carried out by means
of exchange of information, experience and best practices as well as by means

EU/VN/en 258

of policy cooperation. Where appropriate, seminars, workshops, training,
studies, technical assistance and capacity building may be considered.

4. The Parties acknowledge the potentially important role of the private
sector in cooperation and shall support its involvement in order to contribute
to maximising this Agreement's benefit for economic growth and
development.

ARTICLE 16.3
Animal Welfare

The Parties agree to cooperate on animal welfare as necessary, including
technical assistance and capacity building for the development of animal
welfare standards. For the purpose of this Article they shall consult the
Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures established pursuant to
Article 17.2 (Specialised Committees).

ARTICLE 16.4
Institutional Mechanism

1. Cooperation issues shall be discussed in the relevant specialised
committees established pursuant to Article 17.2 (Specialised Committees). In
areas of cooperation outside the remit of the specialised committees, those
issues shall be discussed within the Trade Committee.

2. Each Party shall designate a contact point within its administration to
liaise with the other Party on matters related to the implementation of this
Chapter.

EU/VN/en 259

1.

CHAPTER 17

INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 17.1
Trade Committee

The Parties hereby establish a Trade Committee comprising

representatives of the Parties.

2.

The Trade Committee shall meet once a year, unless otherwise decided

by the Trade Committee, or in urgent cases at the request of a Party. The
meetings of the Trade Committee shall take place alternately in the Union and
in Viet Nam, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties. The Trade Committee
shall be co-chaired by the Minister of Industry and Trade of Viet Nam and the
Member of the European Commission responsible for Trade, or their
respective delegates. The Trade Committee shall agree on its meeting schedule
and set its agenda.

3.
(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

The Trade Committee shall:
ensure the proper operation of this Agreement;

supervise and facilitate the implementation and application of this
Agreement, and further its general aims;

supervise and coordinate the work of all specialised committees, working
groups and other bodies established under this Agreement, recommend to
those bodies any necessary action, and evaluate and adopt decisions,
where provided for in this Agreement, regarding any subject matter
referred to it by those bodies;

consider ways to further enhance trade and investment relations between
the Parties;

without prejudice to Chapter 15 (Dispute Settlement), seek to solve
problems which might arise in areas covered by this Agreement, or
resolve disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation or application
of this Agreement; and

EU/VN/en 260

(f)

4.

consider any other matter of interest relating to areas covered by this
Agreement.

The Trade Committee may, in accordance with the relevant provisions of

this Agreement:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)
(g)

5.

decide to establish specialised committees, working groups or other
bodies, to allocate responsibilities to them in order to assist it in the
performance of its tasks, and to dissolve them; the Trade Committee shall
determine the composition, remit and tasks of the specialised committees,
working groups or other bodies it establishes;

communicate on issues falling under the scope of this Agreement with all
interested parties, including the private sector, social partners, and civil
society organisations;

consider and recommend to the Parties amendments to this Agreement
or, in cases specifically provided for in this Agreement, amend, by
decision, provisions of this Agreement;

adopt interpretations of the provisions of this Agreement, which shall be
binding on the Parties and all bodies set up under this Agreement,
including arbitration panels referred to under Chapter 15 (Dispute
Settlement);

adopt decisions or make recommendations as envisaged by this
Agreement;

adopt its own rules of procedure; and

take any other action in the exercise of its functions in accordance with
this Agreement.

The Trade Committee shall inform the Joint Committee set up under the

Partnership and Cooperation Agreement as part of the common institutional
framework on its activities and those of its specialised committees, as relevant,

at the regular meetings of the Joint Committee.

EU/VN/en 261

ARTICLE 17.2
Specialised Committees

1. The following specialised committees are hereby established under the
auspices of the Trade Committee:

(a) the Committee on Trade in Goods;
(b) the Committee on Customs;
(c) the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures;

(d) the Committee on Investment, Trade in Services, Electronic Commerce
and Government Procurement; and

(e) the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development.

2. The composition, remit and tasks of the specialised committees referred
to in paragraph | are defined in the relevant chapters and protocols of this
Agreement and can be modified, if necessary, by decision of the Trade
Committee.

3. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement or agreed by the Parties,
the specialised committees shall meet once a year. They shall also meet at the
request of either Party or of the Trade Committee. They shall be co-chaired, at
an appropriate level, by representatives of the Union and Viet Nam. The
meetings shall take place alternately in the Union and Viet Nam, or by any
other appropriate means of communication as agreed between the Parties. The
specialised committees shall agree on their meeting schedule and set their
agenda by mutual consent. Each specialised committee may decide its own
rules of procedure in the absence of which the rules of procedure of the Trade
Committee shall apply mutatis mutandis.

4. The specialised committees may submit proposals for decisions to be
adopted by the Trade Committee or take decisions when this Agreement so
provides.

5. At the request of a Party, or upon a reference from the relevant
specialised committee, or when preparing a discussion in the Trade
Committee, the Committee on Trade in Goods may address matters arising in

EU/VN/en 262

the areas of customs and sanitary and phytosanitary measures if this could
facilitate the resolution of a matter that cannot otherwise be resolved by the
relevant specialised committee.

6. The specialised committees shall inform the Trade Committee of their
schedules and agenda sufficiently in advance of their meetings and shall report
to the Trade Committee on results and conclusions of their meetings. The
existence of a specialised committee shall not prevent either Party from
bringing any matter directly to the Trade Committee.

ARTICLE 17.3
Working Groups

1. The following working groups are hereby established under the auspices
of the Committee on Trade in Goods:

(a) the Working Group on Intellectual Property Rights, including
Geographical Indications; and

(b) the Working Group on Motor Vehicles and Parts.

2. The Trade Committee may decide to establish other working groups for a
specific task or subject matter.

3. The Trade Committee shall determine the composition, remit and tasks of
the working groups.

4. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, working groups shall meet once a
year. They shall also meet at the request of either Party or of the Trade
Committee. They shall be co-chaired, at appropriate level, by representatives
of the Union and Viet Nam. The meetings shall take place alternately in the
Union or Viet Nam, or by any other appropriate means of communication as
agreed between the Parties. The working groups shall agree on their meeting
schedule and set their agenda by mutual consent. They may agree their own
rules of procedure in the absence of which the rules of procedure of the Trade
Committee shall apply mutatis mutandis.

5. Working groups shall inform the relevant specialised committees of their

EU/VN/en 263

schedules and agenda sufficiently in advance of their meetings. They shall
report on their activities at each regular meeting of the relevant specialised
committees. The existence of a working group shall not prevent either Party
from bringing any matter directly to the Trade Committee or the relevant
specialised committees.

ARTICLE 17.4
Decision-Making of the Trade Committee

1. The Trade Committee shall, for the purpose of attaining the objectives of
this Agreement, have the power to take decisions, where provided for in this
Agreement. The decisions taken shall be binding on the Parties, which shall
take the measures necessary for the implementation of these decisions.

2. The Trade Committee may make appropriate recommendations to the
Parties.

3. All decisions and recommendations of the Trade Committee shall be
made by mutual consent.

ARTICLE 17.5
Amendments

1. The Parties may amend this Agreement. An amendment shall enter into
force after the Parties exchange written notifications certifying that they have
completed their respective applicable legal procedures as provided for in
Article 17.16 (Entry into Force).

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the Trade Committee may amend this
Agreement as provided for in this Agreement. The Parties shall adopt the
decision in the Trade Committee in accordance with their respective
applicable legal procedures.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the list of entities in Sections A (Central
Government Entities) to C (Other Covered Entities) of Annexes 9-A
(Coverage of Government Procurement for the Union) and 9-B (Coverage of

EU/VN/en 264

Government Procurement for Viet Nam) may be modified in accordance with
Articles 9.20 (Modification and Rectification to Coverage) and 9.23
(Committee on Investment, Trade in Services, Electronic Commerce and
Government Procurement).

ARTICLE 17.6
Evolving WTO Law

If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated
into this Agreement is amended, the Parties shall consult with each other with
a view to finding a mutually satisfactory solution, where necessary. As a result
of such a review, the Trade Committee may take a decision to amend this
Agreement accordingly.

ARTICLE 17.7
Taxation

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of either
the Union or one of its Member States or Viet Nam under any tax agreement
between any Member State of the Union and Viet Nam. In the event of any
inconsistency between this Agreement and any tax agreement, that tax
agreement shall prevail to the extent of such inconsistency.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as preventing the Parties
from distinguishing, in the application of the relevant provisions of their fiscal
legislation, between taxpayers who are not in the same situation, in particular
with regard to their place of residence or with regard to the place where their
capital is invested.

3. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as preventing the adoption
or enforcement of any measure aimed at preventing the avoidance or evasion
of taxes pursuant to the tax provisions of agreements to avoid double taxation
or other tax arrangements or domestic fiscal legislation.

EU/VN/en 265

ARTICLE 17.8
Current Account

The Parties shall authorise, in freely convertible currency, and in accordance
with the provisions of Articles of the Agreement of the International Monetary
Fund, as applicable, any payments and transfers with regard to transactions on
the current account of the balance-of-payments between the Parties which fall
within the scope of this Agreement, in particular relating to their respective
specific commitments under Sub-Section 6 (Financial Services) of Section E
(Regulatory Framework) of Chapter 8 (Liberalisation of Investment, Trade in
Services and Electronic Commerce).

ARTICLE 17.9
Capital Movements

1. With regard to transactions on the capital and financial account of
balance-of-payments, the Parties shall not impose any restrictions on the free
movement of capital relating to investments liberalised in accordance with
Section B (Liberalisation of Investment) of Chapter 8 (Liberalisation of
Investment, Trade in Services and Electronic Commerce).

2. The Parties shall consult each other with a view to facilitating the
movement of capital between them in order to promote trade and investment.

ARTICLE 17.10

Application of Laws and Regulations relating
to Capital Movements, Payments or Transfers

Articles 17.8 (Current Account) and 17.9 (Capital Movements) shall not be
construed as preventing a Party from applying in an equitable and non-
discriminatory manner, and in a way that would not constitute a disguised
restriction on trade and investment, its laws and regulations relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency, bank recovery and resolution, the protection of
the rights of creditors, or the prudential supervision of financial

EU/VN/en 266

institutions;
(b) issuing, trading, or dealing in financial instruments;

(c) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers where necessary to
assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;

(d) criminal or penal offences, deceptive or fraudulent practices;
(e) ensuring the satisfaction of judgments in adjudicatory proceedings; or

(f) social security, public retirement or compulsory savings schemes.

ARTICLE 17.11

Temporary Safeguard Measures with Regard
to Capital Movements, Payments or Transfers

In exceptional circumstances of serious difficulties for the operation of the
Union's economic and monetary union, or, in the case of Viet Nam, for the
operation of the monetary and exchange rate policy, or a threat thereof, the
Party concerned may take safeguard measures that are strictly necessary with
regard to capital movements, payments or transfers for a period not exceeding
one year.

ARTICLE 17.12

Restrictions in Case of Balance-of-Payments or External Financial
Difficulties

1. Where a Party experiences serious balance-of-payments or external
financial difficulties, or a threat thereof, 1t may adopt or maintain safeguard
measures with regard to capital movements, payments or transfers, which
shall:

(a) be non-discriminatory compared to third countries in like situations;

(b) not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance-of-payments or
external financial difficulties;

EU/VN/en 267

(c) be consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the International
Monetary Fund as applicable;

(d) avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and financial
interests of the other Party; and

(e) be temporary and phased out progressively as the situation improves.

2. In the case of trade in goods, each Party may adopt restrictive measures
in order to safeguard its external financial position or balance-of-payments.
Those restrictive measures shall be in accordance with GATT 1994 and the
Understanding on the Balance-of-Payments Provisions of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994.

3. In the case of trade in services or the liberalisation of investments, each
Party may adopt restrictive measures in order to safeguard its external
financial position or its balance-of-payments. Those restrictive measures shall
respect the conditions mentioned in Article XII of GATS.

4. A Party maintaining or having adopted the measures referred to in
paragraphs | to 3 shall promptly notify the other Party of them and present, as
soon as possible, a time schedule for their removal.

5. Where restrictions are adopted or maintained under this Article,
consultations shall be held promptly in the Committee on Investment, Trade in
Services, Electronic Commerce and Government Procurement unless
consultations are held in other fora. The consultations shall assess the balance-
of-payments or external financial difficulty that led to the respective measures,
taking into account, inter alia, such factors as:

(a) the nature and extent of the difficulties;
(b) the external economic and trading environment; or
(c) alternative corrective measures which may be available.

The consultations shall address the compliance of any restrictive measures
with paragraphs | to 3. All relevant findings of statistical or factual nature
presented by the IMF shall be accepted and conclusions shall take into account
the assessment by the IMF of the balance-of-payments and the external
financial situation of the Party concerned.

EU/VN/en 268

ARTICLE 17.13
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as:

(a) requiring either Party to furnish information, the disclosure of which it
considers contrary to its essential security interests;

(b) preventing either Party from taking any action which it considers
necessary for the protection of its essential security interests:

(i) connected with the production of or trade in arms, munitions and
war materials and relating to traffic in other goods and materials and
to economic activities carried out directly or indirectly for the
purpose of provisioning a military establishment;

(11) relating to the supply of services carried out directly or indirectly for
the purpose of provisioning a military establishment;

(111) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials from
which they are derived; or

(iv) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations;
or

(c) preventing a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations for the purpose of maintaining
international peace and security.

ARTICLE 17.14
Preference Utilisation

After one year from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties
shall exchange by | July each year annual import statistics for the previous
year, including figures at tariff line level, on preferential and on non-
preferential trade in goods between them.

EU/VN/en 269

ARTICLE 17.15
Disclosure of Information

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as requiring a Party to
make available confidential information, the disclosure of which would
impede law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or
which would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular
enterprises, public or private, except where a panel requires confidential
information in dispute settlement proceedings under Chapter 15 (Dispute
Settlement). In such cases, the panel shall ensure that confidentiality is fully
protected.

2. When a Party submits to the Trade Committee or to specialised
committees information which is considered confidential under its laws and
regulations, the other Party shall treat that information as confidential, unless
the submitting Party agrees otherwise.

ARTICLE 17.16
Entry into Force

1. This Agreement shall be approved or ratified by the Parties in accordance
with their respective applicable legal procedures.

2. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second
month following the month during which the Parties have notified each other
of the completion of their applicable legal procedures for the entry into force
of this Agreement. The Parties may agree on another date.

3. Notifications in accordance with paragraph 2 shall be sent to the
Secretary-General of the Council of the European Union and to the Ministry
of Industry and Trade of Viet Nam.

EU/VN/en 270

ARTICLE 17.17
Duration
1. This Agreement shall be valid indefinitely.

2. Either Party may notify the other Party in writing of its intention to
terminate this Agreement. The termination shall take effect on the last day of
the sixth month after the notification.

ARTICLE 17.18
Fulfilment of Obligations

1. The Parties shall take any general or specific measures required to fulfil
their obligations under this Agreement. They shall ensure that the objectives
set out in this Agreement are attained.

2. If a Party considers that the other Party has committed a material breach
of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, it may take appropriate
measures with respect to this Agreement in accordance with Article 57 of the
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.

ARTICLE 17.19
Persons Exercising Delegated Governmental Authority

Unless otherwise specified in this Agreement, each Party shall ensure that any
person, including a state-owned enterprise, an enterprise granted special rights
or privileges or a designated monopoly, that has been delegated regulatory,
administrative or other governmental authority by a Party at any level of
government as provided for in its domestic legislation, acts in accordance with
the Party's obligations as set out in this Agreement in the exercise of its
authority.

EU/VN/en 271

ARTICLE 17.20
No Direct Effect

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as conferring rights or imposing
obligations on persons, other than those created between the Parties under
public international law. Viet Nam may provide otherwise under its domestic
law.

ARTICLE 17.21
Annexes, Appendices, Joint Declarations, Protocols and Understandings

The Annexes, Appendices, Joint Declarations, Protocols and Understandings
to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof.

ARTICLE 17.22
Relations to other Agreements

1. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, previous agreements
between the Member States of the Union or the European Community or the
Union, of the one part, and Viet Nam, of the other part, are not superseded or
terminated by this Agreement.

2. This Agreement shall be part of the overall relations between the Union
and its Member States, of the one part, and Viet Nam, of the other part, as
provided for in the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement and shall form
part of the common institutional framework.

3. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as requiring a Party to act
in a manner inconsistent with its obligations under the WTO Agreement.

EU/VN/en 272

ARTICLE 17.23
Future Accessions to the Union

1. The Union shall notify Viet Nam of any request for accession of a third
country to the Union.

2. During the negotiations between the Union and the third country referred
to in paragraph 1, the Union shall endeavour to:

(a) provide, upon request of Viet Nam, and to the extent possible,
information regarding any matter covered by this Agreement; and

(b) take into account concerns expressed by Viet Nam.

3. The Union shall notify Viet Nam of the entry into force of any accession
to the Union.

4. The Trade Committee shall examine, sufficiently in advance of the date
of accession of a third country to the Union, any effects which that accession
may have on this Agreement. The Parties may, by decision of the Trade
Committee, put in place any necessary adjustments of this Agreement or
transitional arrangements.

ARTICLE 17.24
Territorial Application
1. This Agreement applies:

(a) with respect to the Union, to the territories in which the Treaty on
European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union are applied and under the conditions laid down in those Treaties;
and

(b) with respect to Viet Nam, to its territory.

References to "territory" in this Agreement shall be understood in accordance
with subparagraphs (a) and (b), except as otherwise expressly provided for.

2. As regards the provisions concerning the tariff treatment of goods, this

EU/VN/en 273

Agreement also applies to those areas of the Union customs territory not
covered by subparagraph 1 (a).

ARTICLE 17.25
Authentic Texts

This Agreement is drawn up in duplicate in the Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech,
Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek,
Hungarian, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish, Portuguese,
Romanian, Slovak, Slovenian, Spanish, Swedish and Vietnamese languages,
each text being equally authentic.

---

CHAPTER 1

OBJECTIVES AND GENERAL DEFINITIONS

ARTICLE 1.1
Objective

The objective of this Agreement is to enhance the investment relations between the Parties in

accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 1.2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Agreement:

(a) "natural person of a Party" means, in the case of the EU Party, a national of one of the
Member States of the Union in accordance with its domestic laws and regulations and, in the
case of Viet Nam, a national of Viet Nam in accordance with its domestic laws and

regulations;

' The term "natural person" includes natural persons permanently residing in Latvia who are

not citizens of Latvia or any other state but who are entitled, under the laws and regulations of
Latvia, to receive a non-citizen's passport (Alien's Passport).

EU/VN/IPA/en 7

(b)

"juridical person" means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised under
applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or
governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole

proprietorship or association;

"juridical person of a Party" means a juridical person of the EU Party or a juridical person of
Viet Nam, set up in accordance with the domestic laws and regulations of a Member State of
the Union, or of Viet Nam, respectively, and engaged in substantive business operations in

the territory of the Union or of Viet Nam, respectively;
a juridical person is:

(i) "owned" by natural or juridical persons of one of the Parties if more than 50 per cent of
the equity interest in it is beneficially owned by persons of the EU Party, or of

Viet Nam, respectively; or

In line with its notification of the Treaty establishing the European Community to the World
Trade Organization (WT/REG39/1), the Union and its Member States understand that the
concept of "effective and continuous link" with the economy the Union enshrined in

Article 54 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union is equivalent to the
concept of "substantive business operations". Accordingly, for a juridical person set up in
accordance with the laws and regulations of Viet Nam and having only its registered office or
central administration in the territory of Viet Nam, the Union and its Member States shall
only apply the benefits of this Agreement if that juridical person possesses an effective and
continuous link with the economy of Viet Nam.

EU/VN/IPA/en 8

(d)

(f)

(g)

(ii) "controlled" by natural or juridical persons of one of the Parties if persons of the EU
Party, or of Viet Nam, respectively, have the power to name a majority of its directors

or otherwise to legally direct its actions;

"services supplied and activities performed in the exercise of governmental authority" means
services supplied or activities performed neither on a commercial basis nor in competition

with one or more economic operators;

"economic activities" includes activities of an industrial, commercial and professional
character and activities of craftsmen, but do not include services supplied or activities

performed in the exercise of governmental authority;

"operation" means, with respect to an investment, the conduct, management, maintenance,

use, enjoyment, sale or other forms of disposal of the investment;'
"measures adopted or maintained by a Party" means measures taken by:
(i) central, regional or local governments and authorities; and

(41) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central, regional or

local governments or authorities;

For greater certainty, this does not include steps taking place at the time of or before the
procedures required for making the related investment are completed in accordance with the
applicable laws and regulations.

EU/VN/IPA/en 9

(h)

"investment" means every kind of asset which is owned or controlled, directly or indirectly,
by an investor of a Party in the territory of the other Party, which has the characteristics of an
investment, including such characteristics as the commitment of capital or other resources, the
expectation of gain or profit, the assumption of risk and a certain duration; forms that an

investment may take include:

(i) tangible or intangible, movable or immovable property, as well as any other property

rights, such as leases, mortgages, liens and pledges;

(ii) an enterprise as well as shares, stocks and other forms of equity participation in an

enterprise, including rights derived therefrom;

(ii1) bonds, debentures, and loans and other debt instruments, including rights derived

therefrom;

(iv) turnkey, construction, management, production, concession, revenue-sharing and other

similar contracts;

For greater certainty, the territory of a Party includes its exclusive economic zone and
continental shelf, as provided for under United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
done at Montego Bay on 10 December 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the "UNCLOS").
For the purpose of the definition of "investment", an "enterprise" does not include a
representative office. For greater certainty, the fact that a representative office is established
in the territory of a Party is not in itself considered that there is an investment.

EU/VN/IPA/en 10

(v) claims to money or to other assets or any contractual performance having an economic

value;! and
(vi) intellectual property rights and goodwill;

returns that are invested shall be treated as investments provided that they have the
characteristics of an investment and any alteration of the form in which assets are invested or
reinvested shall not affect their qualification as investments as long as they maintain the

characteristics of an investment;

For greater certainty, claims to money do not include claims to money that arise solely from
commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a natural or juridical person in the
territory of a Party to a natural or juridical person in the territory of the other Party, or
financing of such contract other than a loan covered by subparagraph (111), or any related
order, judgement, or arbitral award.

For the purposes of this Agreement, intellectual property rights refer at least to all categories
of intellectual property that are referred to in Sections 1 to 7 of Part II of the TRIPS
Agreement, namely:

(a) copyright and related rights;

(b) trademarks;

(c) geographical indications;

(d) industrial designs;

(e) patent rights;

(f) layout-designs (topographies) of integrated circuits;

(g) protection of undisclosed information; and

(h) plant varieties.

EU/VN/IPA/en 11

(i)

(j)

(k)

(1)

(m)

(n)

(0)

"investor of a Party" means a natural person of a Party or a juridical person of a Party who has

made an investment in the territory of the other Party;
"returns" means all amounts yielded by or derived from an investment or reinvestment,
including profits, dividends, capital gains, royalties, interest, payments in connection with

intellectual property rights, payments in kind and all other lawful income;

"measure" means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,

procedure, decision, administrative action or any other form;

"person" means a natural person or a legal person;

"third country" means a country or territory outside the scope of territorial application of this

Agreement as defined in Article 4.22 (Territorial Application);
"EU Party" means the Union or its Member States or the Union and its Member States within
their respective areas of competence as derived from the Treaty on the European Union and

the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union;

"Party" means the EU Party or Viet Nam;

EU/VN/IPA/en 12

(p) "domestic" means with regard to legislation, law or laws and regulations for the Union and its
Member States and for Viet Nam, respectively, legislation, law or laws and regulations at
central, regional or local level; and

(q) "covered investment" means an investment by investor of a Party in the territory of the other
Party, in existence as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement or made or acquired
thereafter, that has been made in accordance with the other Party's applicable law and
regulations.

CHAPTER 2

INVESTMENT PROTECTION

ARTICLE 2.1

Scope

1. | This Chapter applies to:

(a) covered investment, and

(b) investors of a Party with respect to the operation of their covered investment.

For greater certainty, the domestic laws and regulations of the Member States of the Union
include the Union's laws and regulations.

EU/VN/IPA/en 13

(a)

(b)

Articles 2.3 (National Treatment) and 2.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) do not apply to:
audio-visual services;

mining, manufacturing and processing of nuclear materials;

production of or trade in arms, munitions and war material;

national maritime cabotage;

domestic and international air transport services, whether scheduled or non-scheduled, and

services directly related to the exercise of traffic rights, other than:

(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during which an aircraft is withdrawn from

service;

For greater certainty, processing of nuclear materials includes all the activities contained in
the International Standard Industrial Classification of all Economic Activities as set out in
Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, N 4, ISIC REV 3.1, 2002
code 2330.

Without prejudice to the scope of activities which constitute cabotage under domestic laws
and regulations, national maritime cabotage under this Sub-Section covers transportation of
passengers or goods between a port or point located in Member State of the Union or

Viet Nam and another port or point located in that same Member State of the Union or

Viet Nam, including on its continental shelf, as provided for in UNCLOS, and traffic
originating and terminating in the same port or point located in a Member State of the Union
or Viet Nam.

EU/VN/IPA/en 14

(ii) the selling and marketing of air transport services;

(111) computer reservation system services;

(iv) ground handling services; and

(v) airport operation services;

and

(f) | services supplied and activities performed in the exercise of governmental authority.

3. Articles 2.3 (National Treatment) and 2.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) do not apply to
subsidies granted by the Parties.

4. This Chapter does not apply to the Parties' respective social security systems or to activities in
the territory of each Party, which are connected, even occasionally, with the exercise of official

authority.

In the case of the EU Party "subsidy" includes "state aid" as defined in Union law. For
Viet Nam, "subsidy" includes investment incentives, and investment assistance such as
production site assistance, human resources training and competitiveness strengthening
activities, such as assistance for technology, research and development, legal aids, market
information and promotion.

EU/VN/IPA/en 15

5. This Chapter does not apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking access to the
employment market of a Party, nor does it apply to measures regarding citizenship, residence or

employment on a permanent basis.

6. With the exception of Articles 2.1 (Scope), 2.2 (Investment and Regulatory Measures and
Objectives) and 2.5 (Treatment of Investment) to 2.9 (Subrogation), nothing in this Agreement shall
be construed as limiting the obligations of the Parties under Chapter 9 (Government Procurement)
of the Free Trade Agreement or to impose any additional obligation with respect to government
procurement. For greater certainty, measures with respect to government procurement that are in
compliance with Chapter 9 (Government Procurement) of the Free Trade Agreement shall not be
considered a breach of Articles 2.1 (Scope), 2.2 (Investment and Regulatory Measures and
Objectives) and 2.5 (Treatment of Investment) to 2.9 (Subrogation).

ARTICLE 2.2
Investment and Regulatory Measures and Objectives
1. The Parties reaffirm their right to regulate within their territories to achieve legitimate policy

objectives, such as the protection of public health, safety, environment or public morals, social or

consumer protection, or promotion and protection of cultural diversity.

EU/VN/IPA/en 16

2. For greater certainty, this Chapter shall not be interpreted as a commitment from a Party that
it will not change its legal and regulatory framework, including in a manner that may negatively

affect the operation of investments or the investor's expectations of profits.

3. For greater certainty and subject to paragraph 4, a Party's decision not to issue, renew or
maintain a subsidy or a grant shall not constitute a breach of this Chapter in the following

circumstances:

(a) in the absence of any specific commitment to an investor of the other Party or to a covered

investment under law or contract to issue, renew, or maintain that subsidy or grant; or

(b) in accordance with any terms or conditions attached to the issuance, renewal or maintenance

of the subsidy or grant.

4. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing a Party from
discontinuing the granting of a subsidy or requesting its reimbursement, or as requiring that Party
to compensate the investor therefor, where such action has been ordered by one of its competent

authorities listed in Annex 1 (Competent Authorities).

In the case of the EU Party, "subsidy" includes "state aid" as defined in the Union's law. For
Viet Nam, "subsidy" includes investment incentives, and investment assistance such as
production site assistance, human resources training and competitiveness strengthening
activities, such as assistance for technology, research and development, legal aids, market
information and promotion.

EU/VN/IPA/en 17

ARTICLE 2.3

National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party and to covered investments, with
respect to the operation of the covered investments, treatment no less favourable than that it

accords, in like situations, to its own investors and to their investments.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph | and, in the case of Viet Nam subject to Annex 2 (Exemption for
Viet Nam on National Treatment), a Party may adopt or maintain any measure with respect to the
operation of a covered investment provided that such measure is not inconsistent with the
commitments set out in Annex 8-A (The Union's Schedule of Specific Commitments) or Annex 8-B
(Viet Nam's Schedule of Specific Commitments) of the Free Trade Agreement, respectively, where

such measure is:

(a) a measure that is adopted on or before the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

(b) a measure referred to in subparagraph (a) that is being continued, replaced or amended after
the date of entry into force of this Agreement, provided the measure is no less consistent with

paragraph | after it is continued, replaced or amended than the measure as it existed prior to

its continuation, replacement or amendment; or

EU/VN/IPA/en 18

(c)

1.

a measure not falling within subparagraph (a) or (b), provided it is not applied in respect of, or
in a way that causes loss or damage to, investments made in the territory of the Party before
the date of entry into force of such measure.

ARTICLE 2.4

Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party and to covered investments, with

respect to the operation of the covered investments, treatment no less favourable than the treatment

it accords, in like situations, to investors of a third country and their investments.

2.

(a)

(b)

Paragraph | does not apply to the following sectors:

communication services, except for postal services and telecommunication services;

recreational, cultural and sporting services;

For the purposes of this subparagraph, the Parties understand that if a Party has provided for a
reasonable phase-in period for the implementation of a measure or if that Party has made any
other attempt to address the effects of the measure on investments made before the date of
entry into force of the measure, those factors shall be taken into account in determining
whether the measure causes loss or damage to investments made before the date of entry into
force of the measure.

EU/VN/IPA/en 19

(c) fishery and aquaculture;
(d) forestry and hunting; and
(e) mining, including oil and gas.

3. Paragraph | shall not be construed as obliging a Party to extend to investors of the other Party
or covered investments the benefit of any treatment granted pursuant to any bilateral, regional or

international agreement that entered into force before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

4. Paragraph 1 shall not be construed as obliging a Party to extend to investors of the other Party

or covered investments the benefit of:

(a) any treatment granted pursuant to any bilateral, regional or multilateral agreement which
includes commitments to abolish substantially all barriers to investment among the parties or

requires the approximation of legislation of the parties in one or more economic sectors;

(b) any treatment resulting from any international agreement for the avoidance of double taxation

or other international agreement or arrangement relating wholly or mainly to taxation; or

For greater certainty, the ASEAN Economic Community falls within the concept of regional
agreement under this subparagraph.

EU/VN/IPA/en 20

(c) any treatment resulting from measures providing for the recognition of qualifications, licences
or prudential measures in accordance with Article VII of the General Agreement on Trade in

Services or its Annex on Financial Services.

5. For greater certainty, the term "treatment" referred to in paragraph 1 does not include dispute
resolution procedures or mechanisms, such as those included in Section B (Resolution of Disputes
between Investors and Parties) of Chapter 3 (Dispute Resolution), provided for in any other
bilateral, regional or international agreements. Substantive obligations in such agreements do not in
themselves constitute "treatment" and thus cannot be taken into account when assessing a breach of
this Article. Measures by a Party pursuant to those substantive obligations shall be considered

"treatment".

6. This Article shall be interpreted in accordance with the principle of ejusdem generis.

As contained in Annex 1b of the Marrakesh Agreement establishing the World Trade
Organization, done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994.

For greater certainty, this paragraph shall not be construed as preventing the interpretation of
other provisions of this Agreement, where appropriate, in accordance with the principle of
ejusdem generis.

EU/VN/IPA/en 21

1.

ARTICLE 2.5

Treatment of Investment

Each Party shall accord fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security to

investors of the other Party and covered investments in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 7 and

Annex 3 (Understanding on the Treatment of Investments).

2.

A Party breaches the obligation of fair and equitable treatment referred to in paragraph 1

where a measure or series of measures constitutes:

(a)

(b)

(d)

(e)

(f)

a denial of justice in criminal, civil or administrative proceedings;

a fundamental breach of due process in judicial and administrative proceedings;

manifest arbitrariness;

targeted discrimination on manifestly wrongful grounds, such as gender, race or religious

belief;

abusive treatment such as coercion, abuse of power or similar bad faith conduct; or

a breach of any further elements of the fair and equitable treatment obligation adopted by the

Parties in accordance with paragraph 3.

EU/VN/IPA/en 22

3. Treatment not listed in paragraph 2 may constitute a breach of fair and equitable treatment
where the Parties have so agreed in accordance with the procedures provided for in

Article 4.3 (Amendments).

4. | When applying paragraphs | to 3, a dispute settlement body under Chapter 3 (Dispute
Settlement) may take into account whether a Party made a specific representation to an investor of
the other Party to induce a covered investment that created a legitimate expectation, and upon which
the investor relied in deciding to make or maintain that investment, but that the Party subsequently

frustrated.

5. For greater certainty, the term "full protection and security" referred to in paragraph | refers
to a Party's obligations to act as may be reasonably necessary to protect physical security of the

investors and the covered investments.

6. | Where a Party has entered into a written agreement with investors of the other Party or
covered investments that satisfies all of the following conditions, that Party shall not breach that

agreement through the exercise of governmental authority. The conditions are:

(a) the written agreement is concluded and takes effect after the date of entry into force of this

Agreement;'

For greater certainty, a written agreement that is concluded and takes effect after the date of
entry into force of this Agreement does not include the renewal or extension of an agreement
in accordance with the provisions of the original agreement, and on the same or substantially
the same terms and conditions as the original agreement, which has been concluded and
entered into force before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

EU/VN/IPA/en 23

(b) the investor relies on the written agreement in deciding to make or maintain the covered
investment other than the written agreement itself and the breach causes actual damages to

that investment;

(c) the written agreement creates an exchange of rights and obligations in connection to the said

investment, binding on both parties; and

(d) the written agreement does not contain a clause on the settlement of disputes between the

parties to that agreement by international arbitration.

7. A breach of another provision of this Agreement, or of a separate international agreement,

does not establish that there has been a breach of this Article.

ARTICLE 2.6
Compensation for Losses

1. Investors of a Party whose covered investments suffer losses owing to war or other armed
conflict, a revolution, a state of national emergency, a revolt, an insurrection or a riot in the territory
of the other Party shall be accorded by that other Party, with respect to restitution, indemnification,
compensation or other form of settlement, treatment no less favourable than that accorded by that

other Party to its own investors or to the investors of any third country.

' The term "written agreement" means an agreement in writing, entered into by a Party with an

investor of the other Party or their investment and negotiated and executed by both parties,
whether in a single instrument or multiple instruments.

EU/VN/IPA/en 24

2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, investors of a Party who, in any of the situations referred to
in paragraph 1, suffer losses in the territory of the other Party shall be accorded prompt, adequate

and effective restitution or compensation by the other Party if those losses result from:

(a) requisitioning of covered investment or a part thereof by the other Party's armed forces or

authorities; or

(b) destruction of covered investment or a part thereof by the other Party's armed forces or

authorities,

which was not required by the necessity of the situation.

ARTICLE 2.7

Expropriation
1. A Party shall not nationalise or expropriate the covered investments of investors of the other
Party either directly, or indirectly through measures having an effect equivalent to nationalisation or
expropriation (hereinafter referred to as "expropriation"), except:

(a) fora public purpose;

(b) under due process of law;

EU/VN/IPA/en 25

(c) on a non-discriminatory basis; and

(d) against payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation.

2. The compensation referred to in paragraph 1| shall amount to the fair market value of the
covered investment at the time immediately before the expropriation or the impending expropriation
became public knowledge, whichever is earlier, plus interest at a reasonable rate established on a
commercial basis, from the date of expropriation until the date of payment. Such compensation
shall be effectively realisable, freely transferable in accordance with Article 2.8 (Transfer) and

made without delay.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, in the case that Viet Nam is the expropriating Party, any

measure of direct expropriation relating to land shall be:

(a) fora purpose in accordance with the applicable domestic laws and regulations; and

(b) upon payment of compensation equivalent to the market value, while recognising the

applicable domestic laws and regulations.

4. The issuance of compulsory licences in relation to intellectual property rights does not
constitute an expropriation within the meaning of paragraph 1, to the extent that such issuance is
consistent with the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights contained
in Annex 1C of the WTO Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "TRIPS Agreement").

The applicable domestic laws and regulations is Viet Nam's Land Law No. 45/2013/QH13
and Decree No. 44/2014/ND-CP Regulating Land Prices, as at the date of entry into force of
this Agreement.

EU/VN/IPA/en 26

5. An investor affected by an expropriation shall have a right, under the law of the expropriating
Party, to prompt review of its claim and of the valuation of its investment, by a judicial or other
independent authority of that Party.
6. This Article shall be interpreted in accordance with Annex 4 (Understanding on
Expropriation).

ARTICLE 2.8

Transfer

Each Party shall permit all transfers relating to covered investments to be made in a freely
convertible currency, without restriction or delay and at the market rate of exchange applicable on

the date of transfer. Such transfers include:

(a) contributions to capital, such as principal and additional funds to maintain, develop or

increase the investment;

(b) profits, dividends, capital gains and other returns, proceeds from the sale of all or any part of

the investment or from the partial or complete liquidation of the investment;

(c) payments of interest, royalties, management fees, and technical assistance and other fees;

EU/VN/IPA/en 27

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

payments made under a contract entered into by the investor, or the covered investment,

including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;

earnings and other remuneration of personnel engaged from abroad and working in

connection with the investment;

payments made pursuant to Article 2.6 (Compensation for Losses) and

Article 2.7 (Expropriation); and

payments of damages pursuant to an award issued under Section B (Resolution of Disputes

between Investors and Parties) of Chapter 3 (Dispute Settlement).

ARTICLE 2.9

Subrogation

If a Party, or an agency thereof, makes a payment under an indemnity, a guarantee or a contract of

insurance it has entered into in respect of an investment made by one of its investors in the territory

of the other Party, the other Party shall recognise the subrogation or transfer of any right or title or

the assignment of any claim in respect of such investment. The Party or the agency shall have the

right to exercise the subrogated or assigned right or claim to the same extent as the original right or

claim of the investor. Such rights may be exercised by the Party or an agency thereof, or by the

investor only if the Party or an agency thereof so authorises.

EU/VN/IPA/en 28

CHAPTER 3

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

SECTION A

RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES BETWEEN PARTIES

SUB-SECTION 1

OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE

ARTICLE 3.1

Objective

The objective of this Chapter is to establish an effective and efficient mechanism for avoiding and

settling any dispute between the Parties regarding the interpretation and application of this

Agreement with a view to arriving at a mutually agreed solution.

EU/VN/IPA/en 29

ARTICLE 3.2
Scope
This Chapter applies with respect to the avoidance and settlement of any dispute between the
Parties regarding the interpretation or application of the provisions of this Agreement, except as
otherwise provided for in this Agreement.

SUB-SECTION 2

CONSULTATIONS AND MEDIATION

ARTICLE 3.3
Consultations

1. The Parties shall endeavour to resolve any dispute referred to in Article 3.2 (Scope) by

entering into consultations in good faith with the aim of reaching a mutually agreed solution.

2. A Party shall seek consultations by means of a written request to the other Party, copied to the
Committee established pursuant to Article 4.1 (Committee), identifying the measure at issue and the

relevant provisions of this Agreement.

EU/VN/IPA/en 30

3. Consultations shall be held within 30 days of the date of receipt of the request referred to in
paragraph 2 and take place, unless the Parties agree otherwise, in the territory of the Party to which
the request is made. The consultations shall be deemed concluded within 45 days of the date of
receipt of the request, unless both Parties agree to continue consultations. Consultations, in
particular all information disclosed and positions taken by the Parties, shall be confidential and

without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further proceedings.

4. Consultations on matters of urgency, including those regarding perishable goods, seasonal
goods or seasonal services, shall be held within 15 days of the date of receipt of the request referred
to in paragraph 2. The consultations shall be deemed concluded within 20 days, unless both Parties

agree to continue consultations.

5. The Party that sought consultations may have recourse to Article 3.5 (Initiation of the

Arbitration Procedure) if:

(a) the other Party does not respond to the request for consultations within 15 days of the date of

its receipt;

(b) the consultations are not held within the timeframes provided for in paragraphs 3 or 4;

(c) the Parties agree not to have consultations; or

(d) the consultations have been concluded without a mutually agreed solution.

EU/VN/IPA/en 31

6. During consultations each Party shall provide sufficient factual information for an

examination of the manner in which the measure at issue could affect the operation and application

of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 3.4

Mediation Mechanism

The Parties may at any time agree to enter into a mediation procedure pursuant to

Annex 9 (Mediation Mechanism) with respect to any measure adversely affecting investment

between the Parties.

SUB-SECTION 3

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES

ARTICLE 3.5

Initiation of the Arbitration Procedure

1. If the Parties fail to resolve the dispute by recourse to consultations as provided for in

Article 3.3 (Consultations), the Party that sought consultations may request the establishment of an

arbitration panel.

EU/VN/IPA/en 32

2. The request for the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be made in writing to the other
Party and copied to the Committee. The complaining Party shall identify the measure at issue in its
request, and explain how that measure is inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement in such

a manner as to clearly present the legal basis for the complaint.

ARTICLE 3.6

Terms of Reference of the Arbitration Panel

Unless the Parties agree otherwise within 10 days of the date of the selection of the arbitrators, the

terms of reference of the arbitration panel shall be:

"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement cited by the Parties, the
matter referred to in the request for the establishment of an arbitration panel pursuant to

Article 3.5 (Initiation of the Arbitration Procedure), to rule on the conformity of the measure in
question with the provisions referred to in Article 3.2 (Scope), and to set out in its report the
findings of fact, the applicability of relevant provisions and the basic rationale for any findings and

recommendations, in accordance with Articles 3.10 (Interim Report) and 3.11 (Final Report).".

EU/VN/IPA/en 33

ARTICLE 3.7

Establishment of the Arbitration Panel

1. An arbitration panel shall be composed of three arbitrators.

2. Within 10 days of the date of receipt by the Party complained against of the request for the
establishment of an arbitration panel, the Parties shall consult in order to agree on the composition

of the arbitration panel.

3. If the Parties do not agree on the composition of the arbitration panel within the time frame
provided for in paragraph 2, each Party may appoint an arbitrator from the sub-list of that Party
established under Article 3.23 (List of Arbitrators) within 10 days of the expiry of the time frame
provided for in paragraph 2. If a Party fails to appoint an arbitrator from its sub-list the arbitrator
shall be selected by lot, upon request of the other Party, by the chair of the Committee, or the chair's
delegate, from the sub-list of that Party established under Article 3.23 (List of Arbitrators).

4.  If the Parties do not agree on the chairperson of the arbitration panel within the time frame
provided for in paragraph 2 the chair of the Committee, or the chair's delegate, shall select by lot,
upon request of a Party, the chairperson of the arbitration panel from the sub-list of chairpersons

established under Article 3.23 (List of Arbitrators).

5. The chair of the Committee, or the chair's delegate, shall select the arbitrators within five days

of the request referred to in paragraphs 3 or 4.

EU/VN/IPA/en 34

6. | The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which the three selected
arbitrators have notified the Parties of the acceptance of their appointment in accordance with

Annex 7 (Rules of Procedure).

7. If any of the lists provided for in Article 3.23 (List of Arbitrators) have not been established
or do not contain sufficient names at the time a request is made pursuant to paragraphs 3 or 4, the
arbitrators shall be drawn by lot from among the individuals who have been formally proposed by

both Parties or by a Party in the event that only one Party has made a proposal.

ARTICLE 3.8

Dispute Settlement Proceedings of the Arbitration Panel

1. | The rules and procedures set out in this Article, Annexes 7 (Rules of Procedure) and 8 (Code
of Conduct for Arbitrators and Mediators) shall govern the dispute settlement proceedings of an

arbitration panel.

2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, they shall meet the arbitration panel within 10 days of its
establishment in order to determine all matters that the Parties or the arbitration panel deem
appropriate, including the timetable of the proceedings and the remuneration and expenses of the
arbitrators in accordance with Annex 7 (Rules of Procedure). Arbitrators and representatives of the

Parties may take part in this meeting via telephone or video conference.

EU/VN/IPA/en 35

3. The venue of the hearing shall be decided by mutual consent of the Parties. If the Parties do
not agree on the venue of the hearing, it shall be held in Brussels if the complaining Party is

Viet Nam and in Ha Noi if the complaining Party is the EU Party.

4. Any hearing shall be open to the public unless otherwise provided for in Annex 7 (Rules of

Procedure).

5. In accordance with Annex 7 (Rules of Procedure), the Parties shall be given the opportunity to
attend any of the presentations, statements, arguments or rebuttals in the proceedings. Any
information or written submission submitted to the arbitration panel by a Party, including any
comments on the descriptive part of the interim report, responses to questions by the arbitration

panel and comments by a Party on those responses, shall be made available to the other Party.

6. Unless the Parties agree otherwise within three days of the date of establishment of the
arbitration panel, the arbitration panel may receive, in accordance with Annex 7 (Rules of
Procedure), unsolicited written submissions (amicus curiae submissions) from natural or legal

person established in the territory of a Party.

7. For its internal deliberations, the arbitration panel shall meet in closed session where only
arbitrators take part. The arbitration panel may also permit its assistants to be present at its
deliberations. The deliberations of the arbitration panel and the documents submitted to it shall be

kept confidential.

EU/VN/IPA/en 36

ARTICLE 3.9

Preliminary Ruling on Urgency

If a Party so requests, the arbitration panel shall give a preliminary ruling within 10 days of its

establishment on whether it deems the case to be urgent.

ARTICLE 3.10

Interim Report

1. The arbitration panel shall issue an interim report to the Parties setting out the findings of fact,
the applicability of relevant provisions and the basic rationale for any findings and
recommendations, no later than 90 days from the date of establishment of the arbitration panel.
When it considers that this deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the arbitration panel shall
notify the Parties and the Committee in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on
which the arbitration panel plans to issue its interim report. The arbitration panel shall, under no
circumstances, issue the interim report later than 120 days after the date of establishment of the

arbitration panel.

2. A Party may submit a written request, including comments, to the arbitration panel to review

precise aspects of the interim report within 14 days of its notification.

EU/VN/IPA/en 37

3. _Incases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods or seasonal goods or services,
the arbitration panel shall make every effort to issue its interim report within 45 days and, in any
case, no later than 60 days after the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. A Party may
submit a written request, including comments, to the arbitration panel to review precise aspects of

the interim report, within seven days of the notification of the interim report.

4. After considering any written requests, including comments, by the Parties on the interim
report, the arbitration panel may modify its report and make any further examination that it

considers appropriate.

ARTICLE 3.11
Final Report

1. The arbitration panel shall issue its final report to the Parties and to the Committee within
120 days of the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. When it considers that this deadline
cannot be met, the chairperson of the arbitration panel shall notify the Parties and the Committee in
writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the arbitration panel plans to issue
its final report. The arbitration panel shall under no circumstances issue the final report later than

150 days from the date of establishment of the arbitration panel.

EU/VN/IPA/en 38

2. _Incases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods or seasonal goods or services,
the arbitration panel shall make every effort to notify its final report within 60 days of the date of its
establishment. The arbitration panel shall under no circumstances issue the final report later than

75 days from the date of establishment of the arbitration panel.
3. The final report shall include a sufficient discussion of the arguments made at the interim
review stage, and shall clearly address the comments of the Parties.

ARTICLE 3.12

Compliance with the Final Report

The Party complained against shall take any measure necessary to comply promptly and in good
faith with the final report.

ARTICLE 3.13

Reasonable Period of Time for Compliance

1. If immediate compliance is not possible, the Parties shall endeavour to mutually agree on the
period of time to comply with the final report. In such a case, the Party complained against shall, no later than 30 days after the receipt of the final report, notify the complaining Party and the

Committee of the time it will require for compliance (hereinafter referred to as the "reasonable

period of time").

EU/VN/IPA/en 39

2. If there is disagreement between the Parties on the reasonable period of time to comply with
the final report, the complaining Party shall, within 20 days of the receipt of the notification made
in accordance with paragraph 1 by the Party complained against, request, in writing, the arbitration
panel established pursuant to Article 3.7 (Establishment of the Arbitration Panel) (hereinafter
referred to as the "original arbitration panel") to determine the length of the reasonable period of

time. That request shall be notified to the Party complained against and copied to the Committee.
3. The arbitration panel shall notify its ruling on the reasonable period of time to the Parties and
to the Committee within 20 days of the date of the submission of the request referred to in

paragraph 2.

4. The Party complained against shall inform, in writing, the complaining Party of its progress to

comply with the final report at least 30 days before the expiry of the reasonable period of time.

5. The Parties may agree to extend the reasonable period of time.

ARTICLE 3.14

Review of Measure Taken to Comply with the Final Report

1. | The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party and the Committee before

the end of the reasonable period of time of any measure that it has taken to comply with the final

report.

EU/VN/IPA/en 40

2.  If the Parties disagree on the existence or the consistency of any measure taken to comply
with the provisions referred to in Article 3.2 (Scope) and notified under paragraph 1, the
complaining Party may request, in writing, the original arbitration panel to rule on the matter. The
request shall be notified to the Party complained against and copied to the Committee. The
complaining Party shall identify in its request the specific measure at issue, and explain how such
measure is inconsistent with the provisions referred to in Article 3.2 (Scope) in a manner sufficient

to clearly present the legal basis for the complaint.

3. The arbitration panel shall notify its ruling to the Parties and to the Committee within 45 days of

the date of the submission of the request referred to in paragraph 2.

ARTICLE 3.15
Temporary Remedies in Case of Non-Compliance

1. If the Party complained against fails to notify the complaining Party and the Committee of
any measure taken to comply with the final report before the expiry of the reasonable period of
time, or if the arbitration panel rules that no measure to comply with has been taken or that the
measure notified under paragraph 1 of Article 3.14 (Review of Measure Taken to Comply with the
Final Report) is inconsistent with that Party's obligations under the provisions referred to in Article
3.2 (Scope), the Party complained against shall, if so requested by the complaining Party and after

consultations with that Party, present an offer for compensation.

EU/VN/IPA/en 41

2. If the complaining Party decides not to request an offer for compensation or, in case such
request is made, if no agreement on compensation is reached within 30 days of the end of the
reasonable period of time or of the issuance of the arbitration panel ruling under

Article 3.14 (Review of Measure Taken to Comply with the Final Report) that no measure to
comply with has been taken or that a measure taken is inconsistent with the provisions referred to in
Article 3.2 (Scope), the complaining Party shall be entitled, upon notification to the other Party and
to the Committee, to take appropriate measures within the framework of the preferential trade and
investment commitments applicable between the Parties which have an effect equivalent to the
nullification or impairment caused by the violation. The notification shall specify such measures.
The complaining Party may implement the measures at any moment after the expiry of 10 days
from the date of receipt of the notification by the Party complained against, unless the Party

complained against has requested arbitration under paragraph 3 of this Article.

3. If the Party complained against considers that the effect of the measures taken by the
complaining Party is not equivalent to the nullification or impairment caused by the violation, it
may request, in writing, the original arbitration panel to rule on the matter. That request shall be
notified to the complaining Party and copied to the Committee before the expiry of the period of
10 days referred to in paragraph 2. The original arbitration panel shall notify its ruling on the
measures taken by the complaining Party to the Parties and to the Committee within 30 days of the
date of the submission of the request. Obligations shall not be suspended until the original

arbitration panel has notified its ruling, and any suspension shall be consistent with that ruling.

EU/VN/IPA/en 42

(a)

(b)

(c)

The measures set out in this Article shall be temporary and shall not be applied after:

the Parties have reached a mutually agreed solution pursuant to Article 3.19 (Mutually Agreed

Solution);

the Parties have agreed that the measure notified under paragraph 1 of Article 3.14 (Review of
Measure Taken to Comply with the Final Report) brings the Party complained against into

conformity with the provisions referred to in Article 3.2 (Scope); or

any measure found to be inconsistent with the provisions referred to in Article 3.2 (Scope) has
been withdrawn or amended so as to bring it into conformity with those provisions, as ruled
under paragraph 3 of Article 3.14 (Review of Measure Taken to Comply with the Final
Report).

EU/VN/IPA/en 43

ARTICLE 3.16

Review of Measure Taken to Comply After the Adoption

of Temporary Remedies for Non-Compliance

1. | The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party and the Committee of any
measure it has taken to comply with the report of the arbitration panel following the measures
applied by the complaining Party or following the application of compensation, as the case may be.
With the exception of cases referred to in paragraph 2, the complaining Party shall terminate the
measures taken in accordance with Article 3.15 (Temporary Remedies in Case of Non-compliance)
within 30 days of the date of the receipt of the notification. In the event that compensation has been
applied, and with the exception of cases referred to in paragraph 2, the Party complained against
may terminate the application of such compensation within 30 days of its notification that it has

complied with the report of the arbitration panel.

2. If the Parties do not agree on whether the notified measure brings the Party complained
against into conformity with the provisions referred to in Article 3.2 (Scope), within 30 days of the
date of receipt of the notification, the complaining Party shall request, in writing, the original
arbitration panel to rule on the matter. That request shall be notified to the Party complained

against, copied to the Committee.

EU/VN/IPA/en 44

3. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be notified to the Parties and to the Committee
within 45 days of the date of the submission of the request. If the arbitration panel rules that the
notified measure is in conformity with the provisions referred to in Article 3.2 (Scope), the
measures referred to in Article 3.15 (Temporary Remedies in Case of Non-compliance) or the
compensation, as the case may be, shall be terminated. Where relevant, the level of suspension of

obligations or of compensation shall be adapted in light of the ruling of the arbitration panel.
ARTICLE 3.17
Replacement of Arbitrators
If during arbitration proceedings the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, are unable
to participate, withdraw, or need to be replaced because the member does not comply with the
requirements of the Code of Conduct in Annex 8 (Code of Conduct for Arbitrators and Mediators),

the procedure set out in Article 3.7 (Establishment of the Arbitration Panel) applies. The time limit
for the notification of the reports and rulings, as the case may be, shall be extended by 20 days.

EU/VN/IPA/en 45

ARTICLE 3.18

Suspension and Termination of Arbitration Proceedings

1. The arbitration panel shall, at the request of both Parties, suspend its work at any time for a
period agreed by the Parties not exceeding 12 consecutive months. It shall resume its work before
the end of that suspension period at the written request of both Parties. The Parties shall inform the
Committee, accordingly. The arbitration panel may also resume its work at the end of the
suspension period at the written request of either Party. The requesting Party shall inform the
Committee and the other Party, accordingly. If a Party does not request the resumption of the
arbitration panel's work at the expiry of the suspension period, the authority of the arbitration panel
shall lapse and the proceedings shall be terminated. In the event of a suspension of the work of the
arbitration panel, the time frames set out in the relevant provisions of this Chapter shall be extended
by the same period of time for which the work was suspended. The suspension and termination of
the arbitration panel's work are without prejudice to the rights of either Party in other proceedings

subject to Article 3.24 (Choice of Forum).
2. The Parties may agree to terminate the proceedings of the arbitration panel by jointly

notifying the chairperson of the arbitration panel and the Committee at any time before the issuance

of the final report of the arbitration panel.

EU/VN/IPA/en 46

ARTICLE 3.19

Mutually Agreed Solution

The Parties may reach a mutually agreed solution to a dispute under this Chapter at any time. They
shall jointly notify the Committee and the chairperson of the arbitration panel, where applicable, of
any such solution. If the solution requires approval pursuant to the relevant domestic procedures of
either Party, the notification shall refer to this requirement and the dispute settlement procedure
shall be suspended. If such approval is not required, or if the completion of any such domestic

procedures is notified, the dispute settlement procedure shall be terminated.

ARTICLE 3.20

Information and Technical Advice

At the request of a Party, or upon its own initiative, the arbitration panel may request any
information it deems appropriate for the proceedings of the arbitration panel from any source,
including the Parties involved in the dispute. The arbitration panel also has the right to seek the
opinion of experts, as it deems appropriate. The arbitration panel shall consult the Parties before
choosing such experts. Any information obtained under this Article shall be disclosed and submitted

to the Parties for their comments within the time frame set by the arbitration panel.

EU/VN/IPA/en 47

ARTICLE 3.21

Rules of Interpretation

The arbitration panel shall interpret the provisions referred to in Article 3.2 (Scope) in accordance
with customary rules of interpretation of public international law, including those codified in the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, done at Vienna on 23 May 1969 (hereinafter referred to
as the "Vienna Convention"). The arbitration panel shall also take into account relevant
interpretations in reports of panels and of the Appellate Body adopted by the Dispute Settlement
Body under Annex 2 of the WTO Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "DSB"). The reports and
rulings of the arbitration panel cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations of the Parties

provided for in this Agreement.

ARTICLE 3.22
Decisions and Rulings of the Arbitration Panel
1. The arbitration panel shall make every effort to take any decision by consensus. In the event

that a decision cannot be reached by consensus, the matter at issue shall be decided by majority

vote. Dissenting opinions of arbitrators shall in no case be disclosed.

EU/VN/IPA/en 48

2. The reports and rulings of the arbitration panel shall be accepted unconditionally by the
Parties. They shall not create any rights or obligations with respect to natural or legal persons. The
reports and rulings shall set out the findings of fact, the applicability of the relevant provisions
referred to in Article 3.2 (Scope) and the basic rationale behind any findings and conclusions. The
Committee shall make the reports and rulings of the arbitration panel publicly available in their
entirety within 10 days of their issuance, unless it decides not to do so in order to protect
confidential information.

SUB-SECTION 4

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 3.23
List of Arbitrators
1. | The Committee shall, no later than six months after the date of entry into force of this
Agreement, establish a list of at least 15 individuals who are willing and able to serve as arbitrators.
The list shall be composed of three sub-lists:

(a) one sub-list for Viet Nam;

(b) one sub-list for the Union and its Member States; and

EU/VN/IPA/en 49

(c) one sub-list of individuals who are not nationals of either Party and do not have permanent

residence in either Party and who shall act as chairperson of the arbitration panel.

2. Each sub-list shall include at least five individuals. The Committee shall ensure that the list is

always maintained at that minimum number of individuals.

3. Arbitrators shall have demonstrated expertise and experience of law and international trade.
They shall be independent, serve in their individual capacities and not take instructions from any
organisation or government, or be affiliated with the government of any of the Parties, and shall

comply with the Code of Conduct in Annex 8 (Code of Conduct for Arbitrators and Mediators).
4. |The Committee may establish an additional list of 10 individuals with demonstrated expertise
and experience in specific sectors covered by this Agreement. Subject to the agreement of the
Parties, such an additional list shall be used to compose the arbitration panel in accordance with the
procedure set out in Article 3.7 (Establishment of the Arbitration Panel).

ARTICLE 3.24

Choice of Forum
1. | Recourse to the dispute settlement procedure under this Chapter shall be without prejudice to

any action in the framework of the World Trade Organization, including dispute settlement action,

or under any other international agreement to which both Parties are party.

EU/VN/IPA/en 50

2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, a Party shall not, for a particular measure, seek
redress for the breach of a substantially equivalent obligation under this Agreement and under the
WTO Agreement or under any other international agreement to which both Parties are party in the
relevant fora. Once dispute settlement proceedings have been initiated, the Party shall not bring a
claim seeking redress for the breach of the substantially equivalent obligation under the other
agreement to the other forum, unless the forum selected first fails for procedural or jurisdictional

reasons to make findings on the claim seeking redress to that obligation.

3. For the purposes of this Article:

(a) dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement are deemed to be initiated by a
Party's request for the establishment of a panel under Article 6 of the Understanding on Rules

and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes;

(b) dispute settlement proceedings under this Chapter are deemed to be initiated by a Party's
request for the establishment of an arbitration panel under paragraph | of

Article 3.5 (Initiation of the Arbitration Procedure);

(c) dispute settlement proceedings under any other international agreement are deemed to be

initiated in accordance with that agreement.

4. Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude a Party from implementing the suspension of
obligations authorised by the DSB. Neither the WTO Agreement nor the Free Trade Agreement
shall be invoked to preclude a Party from taking appropriate measures under

Article 3.15 (Temporary Remedies in Case of Non-Compliance).

EU/VN/IPA/en 51

ARTICLE 3.25
Time Limits

1.  All time limits laid down in this Section, including the limits for the arbitration panels to
notify their reports and rulings, shall be counted in calendar days from the day following the act or
fact to which they refer, unless otherwise specified.
2. Any time limit referred to in this Section may be modified by mutual agreement of the Parties
to the dispute. The arbitration panel may at any time propose to the Parties to modify any time limit
referred to in this Section, stating the reasons for the proposal.

ARTICLE 3.26

Review and Amendment

The Committee may review and decide to amend Annexes 7 (Rules of Procedure), 8 (Code of

Conduct for Arbitrators and Mediators) and 9 (Mediation Mechanism).

EU/VN/IPA/en 52

SECTION B

Resolution of Disputes between Investors and Parties

SUB-SECTION 1

Scope and Definitions

ARTICLE 3.27
Scope

1. This Section applies to a dispute between, on the one hand, a claimant of one Party and, on
the other hand, the other Party concerning any measure which allegedly constitutes a breach of the
provisions of Chapter 2 (Investment Protection) and which allegedly causes loss or damage to the
claimant or, where the claim is brought on behalf of a locally established company owned or

controlled by the claimant, to the locally established company.

2. For greater certainty, a claimant shall not submit a claim under this Section if its investment
has been made through fraudulent misrepresentation, concealment, corruption or conduct

amounting to an abuse of process.

For greater certainty, the term "measure" may include failures to act.

EU/VN/IPA/en 53

3. The Tribunal and the Appeal Tribunal established pursuant to Articles 3.38 (Tribunal) and

3.39 (Appeal Tribunal), respectively, may not decide claims that fall outside the scope of this

Article.

4. Acclaim with respect to restructuring of debt of a Party shall be addressed in accordance with

this Section and Annex 5 (Public Debt).

ARTICLE 3.28

Definitions

For the purposes of this Section, unless otherwise specified:

(a) "proceedings" means proceedings before the Tribunal or the Appeal Tribunal under this

Section;

(b) "disputing parties" means the claimant and the respondent;

(c) "claimant of a Party" means:

(i) an investor of a Party, as referred to in subparagraph 1(b) of Article 2.1 (Scope), acting

on its own behalf; or

EU/VN/IPA/en 54

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(11) an investor of a Party, as referred to in subparagraph 1(b) of Article 2.1 (Scope), acting
on behalf of a locally established company owned or controlled by that investor; for
greater certainty, a claim submitted under this subparagraph shall be deemed to relate to
a dispute between a Contracting State and a national of another Contracting State for the

purposes of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention;

"ICSID Convention" means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between

States and Nationals of Other States, done at Washington on 18 March 1965;

"non-disputing Party" means Viet Nam when the respondent is the Union or a Member State

of the Union, or the Union when Viet Nam is the respondent;

"respondent" means either Viet Nam or, in the case of the EU Party, either the Union or the

Member State concerned pursuant to Article 3.32 (Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim);

"locally established company" means a juridical person, established in the territory of a Party,

and owned and controlled by an investor of the other Party;

"New York Convention of 1958" means the Convention for the Recognition and Enforcement

of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York on 10 June 1958;

EU/VN/IPA/en 55

(i) "third party funding" means any funding provided by a natural or juridical person who is not a
party to the dispute but who enters into an agreement with a disputing party in order to
finance part or all of the cost of the proceedings in return for a remuneration dependent on the
outcome of the dispute, or any funding provided by a natural or juridical person who is not a
party to the dispute in the form of a donation or grant;

(j) "UNCITRAL" means the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law; and

(k) "UNCITRAL Transparency Rules" means the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency in
Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration.

SUB-SECTION 2

ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION AND CONSULTATIONS

ARTICLE 3.29
Amicable Resolution
Any dispute should as far as possible be settled amicably through negotiations or mediation and,
where possible, before the submission of a request for consultations pursuant to

Article 3.30 (Consultations). Such settlement may be agreed at any time, including after the

commencement of proceedings under this Section.

EU/VN/IPA/en 56

1.

ARTICLE 3.30

Consultations

Where a dispute cannot be resolved amicably as provided for in Article 3.29 (Amicable

Resolution), a claimant of one Party alleging a breach of the provisions referred to in paragraph | of

Article 3.27 (Scope) shall submit a request for consultations to the other Party. The request shall

contain the following information:

(a)

(b)

(d)

(e)

the name and address of the claimant and, where such request is submitted on behalf of a
locally established company, the name, address and place of incorporation of the locally

established company;

the provisions referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 3.27 (Scope) alleged to have been
breached;

the legal and factual basis of the claim, including the measures alleged to breach the

provisions referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 3.27 (Scope);

the relief sought and the estimated amount of damages claimed; and

evidence establishing that the claimant is an investor of the other Party and that it owns or

controls the covered investment including the locally established company where applicable,

in respect of which a request for consultations was submitted.

EU/VN/IPA/en 57

When a request for consultations is submitted by more than one claimant, or on behalf of more than

one locally established company, the information in subparagraphs 1(a) and 1(e) shall be submitted

for each claimant or locally established company, as the case may be.

2.

(a)

(b)

A request for consultations shall be submitted within:

three years of the date on which the claimant or, as applicable, the locally established
company, first acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the measure alleged to be
in breach of the provisions of Chapter 2 (Investment Protection) and knowledge that thereby

loss and damages incurred to:

(i) the claimant, for claims brought by an investor acting on its own behalf; or

(11) the locally established company, for claims brought by an investor acting on behalf of a

locally established company; or

two years of the date on which the claimant or, as applicable, the locally established company,
ceases to pursue claims or proceedings before a tribunal or court under domestic law and, in
any event, no later than seven years after the date on which the claimant first acquired, or
should have first acquired knowledge of the measure alleged to be in breach of the provisions

of Chapter 2 (Investment Protection) and knowledge that thereby loss and damage incurred to:

(i) the claimant, for claims brought by an investor acting on its own behalf; or

EU/VN/IPA/en 58

(ii) the locally established company, for claims brought by an investor acting on behalf of a

locally established company.
3. Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the place of consultation shall be:
(a) Ha Noi where the consultations concern measures of Viet Nam;
(b) Brussels where the consultations concern measures of the Union; or

(c) the capital of the Member State of the Union concerned, where the request for consultations

concerns exclusively measures of that Member State.

Consultations may also take place by videoconference or other means, particularly if a small or

medium-sized enterprise is involved.

4. Unless the disputing parties agree to a longer period, consultations shall be held within

60 days of the submission of the request for consultations.

5. in the event that the claimant has not submitted a claim pursuant to Article 3.33 (Submission
of a Claim) within 18 months of submitting the request for consultations, the claimant shall be
deemed to have withdrawn from proceedings under this Section and may not submit a claim under
this Section. This period may be extended by agreement between the parties involved in the

consultations.

Subparagraph (2)(b) does not apply where Annex 12 (Concurring Proceedings) applies.

EU/VN/IPA/en 59

6. The time limits set out in paragraphs 2 and 5 shall not render claims inadmissible where the
claimant can demonstrate that the failure to request consultations or submit a claim is due to the
claimant's inability to act as a result of actions deliberately taken by the Party concerned, provided

that the claimant acts as soon as reasonably possible after it has become able to act.
7. Incase that the request for consultations concerns an alleged breach of the agreement by the
Union, or by a Member State of the Union, it shall be sent to the Union. If measures of a
Member State of the Union are identified, it shall also be sent to the Member State concerned.
ARTICLE 3.31
Mediation

1. | The disputing parties may at any time agree to have recourse to mediation.

2. Recourse to mediation is voluntary and without prejudice to the legal position of either

disputing party.

3. Recourse to mediation may be governed by the rules set out in Annex 10 (Mediation
Mechanism for Disputes between Investors and Parties). Any time limit mentioned in
Annex 10 (Mediation Mechanism for Disputes between Investors and Parties) may be modified by

mutual agreement between the disputing parties.

EU/VN/IPA/en 60

4. The mediator is appointed by agreement of the disputing parties. Such appointment may
include appointing a mediator from among the Members of the Tribunal appointed pursuant to
Article 3.38 (Tribunal) or the Members of the Appeal Tribunal appointed pursuant to

Article 3.39 (Appeal Tribunal). The disputing parties may also request the President of the Tribunal
to appoint a mediator from among the Members of the Tribunal who are neither nationals of a

Member State of the Union nor of Viet Nam.

5. Once the disputing parties agree to have recourse to mediation, the time limits set out in
paragraphs 2 and 5 of Article 3.30 (Consultations), paragraph 6 of Article 3.53 (Provisional Award)
and paragraph 5 of Article 3.54 (Appeal Procedure) shall be suspended between the date on which it
was agreed to have recourse to mediation and the date on which either party to the dispute decides
to terminate the mediation, by way of a letter to the mediator and the other disputing party. Upon
request of both disputing parties, if a division of the Tribunal has been established pursuant to
Article 3.38 (Tribunal), the division shall stay its proceedings until the date on which either party to
the dispute decides to terminate the mediation, by way of a letter to the mediator and the other

disputing party.

EU/VN/IPA/en 61

SUB-SECTION 3

SUBMISSION OF A CLAIM AND CONDITIONS PRECEDENT

ARTICLE 3.32

Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim

1. If the dispute cannot be settled within 90 days of the submission of the request for
consultations, the claimant may deliver a notice of intent which shall specify, in writing, the
claimant's intention to submit the claim to dispute settlement under this Section and contain the

following information:

(a) the name and address of the claimant and, where such request is submitted on behalf of a
locally established company, the name, address and place of incorporation of the locally

established company;

(b) the provisions referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 3.27 (Scope) that are alleged to have been
breached;

(c) the legal and factual basis of the claim, including the measures that are alleged to breach the

provisions referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 3.27 (Scope); and

EU/VN/IPA/en 62

(d) the relief sought and the estimated amount of damages claimed.

The notice of intent shall be sent to the Union or to Viet Nam, as the case may be. When a measure

of a Member State of the Union is identified, it shall also be sent to the Member State concerned.

2. When a notice of intent has been sent to the Union, the Union shall make a determination of
the respondent and, after having made such a determination, it shall inform the claimant within
60 days of the receipt of the notice of intent as to whether the Union or a Member State of the

Union shall be the respondent.

3. Incase the claimant has not been informed of the determination of the respondent within

60 days of the receipt of the notice of intent:

(a) if the measures identified in the notice are exclusively measures of a Member State of the

Union, that Member State shall be the respondent; or

(b) If the measures identified in the notice include measures of the Union, the Union shall be the

respondent.

4. The claimant may submit a claim pursuant to Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim) on the
basis of the determination referred to in paragraph 2, or, if no such determination has been
communicated to the claimant within the timeframe provided for in paragraph 2, in accordance with

paragraph 3.

EU/VN/IPA/en 63

5. Where either the Union or its Member State is the respondent following a determination made
pursuant to paragraph 2, neither the Union nor the Member State concerned may assert the

inadmissibility of the claim, lack of jurisdiction of the Tribunal or otherwise assert that the claim or
award is unfounded or invalid on the grounds that the proper respondent should be the Union rather

than the Member State or vice versa.

6. The Tribunal and the Appeal Tribunal shall be bound by the determination made pursuant to

paragraph 2.

7. Nothing in this Agreement or the applicable rules on dispute settlement shall prevent the

exchange of all information relating to a dispute between the Union and the Member State

concerned.
ARTICLE 3.33
Submission of a Claim
1. If the dispute cannot be settled within six months of the submission of the request for

consultations and at least three months have elapsed from the submission of the notice of intent to
submit a claim pursuant to Article 3.32 (Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim), the claimant, provided
that it satisfies the requirements set out in Article 3.35 (Procedural and Other Requirements for the
Submission of a Claim), may submit a claim to the Tribunal established pursuant to

Article 3.38 (Tribunal).

EU/VN/IPA/en 64

2. A claim may be submitted to the Tribunal under one of the following sets of rules on dispute

settlement:

(a) the ICSID Convention;

(b) the Rules on the Additional Facility for the Administration of Proceedings (hereinafter
referred to as the "ICSID Additional Facility Rules") by the Secretariat of the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (hereinafter referred to "Secretariat of ICSID"),
where the conditions for proceedings pursuant to subparagraph (a) do not apply;

(c) the arbitration rules of UNCITRAL; or

(d) any other rules by agreement of the disputing parties. In the event that the claimant proposes a
specific set of dispute settlement rules and if, within 30 days of receipt of the proposal, the
disputing parties have not agreed in writing on such rules, or the respondent has not replied to
the claimant, the claimant may submit a claim under the rules provided for in subparagraphs
(a), (b) or (c).

3. All the claims identified by the claimant in the submission of its claim pursuant to this Article

must be based on measures identified in its request for consultations pursuant to subparagraph 1(c)

of Article 3.30 (Consultations).

4.

The rules on dispute settlement referred to in paragraph 2 shall apply subject to the rules set

out in this Section, as supplemented by any rules adopted by the Committee, by the Tribunal or by

the Appeal Tribunal.

EU/VN/IPA/en 65

5. A claim shall be deemed submitted under this Article when the claimant has initiated

proceedings under the applicable rules on dispute settlement.

6. Claims submitted in the name of a class composed of a number of unidentified claimants, or
submitted by a representative intending to conduct the proceedings in the interests of a number of
identified or unidentified claimants that delegate all decisions relating to the proceedings on their

behalf, shall not be admissible.

ARTICLE 3.34

Other Claims

1. A claimant shall not submit a claim to the Tribunal if the claimant has a pending claim before
any other domestic or international court or tribunal concerning the same measure as that alleged to
be inconsistent with the provisions referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 3.27 (Scope) and the same

loss or damage, unless the claimant withdraws such pending claim.

2. A claimant acting on its own behalf shall not submit a claim to the Tribunal if any person
who, directly or indirectly, has an ownership interest in or is controlled by the claimant has a
pending claim before the Tribunal or any other domestic or international court or tribunal
concerning the same measure as that alleged to be inconsistent with the provisions referred to in
paragraph | of Article 3.27 (Scope) and the same loss or damage, unless that person withdraws such

pending claim.

EU/VN/IPA/en 66

3. A claimant acting on behalf of a locally established company shall not submit a claim to the
Tribunal if any person who, directly or indirectly, has an ownership interest in or is controlled by
the locally established company has a pending claim before the Tribunal or any other domestic or
international court or tribunal concerning the same measure as that alleged to be in breach of the
provisions of Chapter 2 (Investment Protection) and the same loss or damage, unless that person

withdraws such pending claim.

4. Before submitting a claim, the claimant shall provide:

(a) evidence that it and, where relevant pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 3, any person who, directly
or indirectly, has an ownership interest in or is controlled by the claimant or the locally
established company, has withdrawn any pending claim referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 or 3;

and

(b) a waiver of its right, and where applicable, of the locally established company's right, to

initiate any claim referred to in paragraph 1.

5. This Article applies in conjunction with Annex 12 (Concurring Proceedings).

6. The waiver provided pursuant to subparagraph 4(b) shall cease to apply where the claim is

rejected on the basis of a failure to meet the nationality requirements to bring an action under this

Agreement.

EU/VN/IPA/en 67

7. Paragraphs 1 to 4, including Annex 12 (Concurring Proceedings), do not apply when claims
submitted to a domestic court or tribunal are initiated for the sole purpose of seeking interim

injunctive or declaratory relief and do not involve the payment of monetary damages.

8. | When claims are brought both pursuant to this Section and Section A (Resolution of Disputes
between the Parties), or both pursuant to this Section and another international agreement
concerning the same treatment as that alleged to be inconsistent with the provisions of

Chapter 2 (Investment Protection), a division of the Tribunal constituted under this Section shall, as
soon as possible after hearing the disputing parties, take into account proceedings pursuant to
Section A (Resolution of Disputes between the Parties) or to another international agreement in its
decision, order or award. To that end, it may also, if it considers necessary, stay its proceedings. In
acting pursuant to this provision, the Tribunal shall respect paragraph 6 of Article 3.53 (Provisional

Award).

ARTICLE 3.35

Procedural and Other Requirements for the Submission of a Claim

1. Acclaim may be submitted to the Tribunal under this Section only if:

(a) the submission of the claim is accompanied by the claimant's consent in writing to the

settlement of the dispute by the Tribunal in accordance with the procedures set out in this

Section and the claimant's designation of one of the set of rules on dispute settlement referred

to in paragraph 2 of Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim) as the applicable dispute settlement

rules;

EU/VN/IPA/en 68

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

2.

at least six months have elapsed since the submission of the request for consultations under
Article 3.30 (Consultations) and at least three months have elapsed since the submission of

the notice of intent to submit a claim under Article 3.32 (Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim);

the request for consultations and the notice of intent to submit a claim fulfil the requirements
set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 3.30 (Consultations), and paragraph | of
Article 3.32 (Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim), respectively;

the legal and factual basis of the dispute was subject to prior consultations pursuant to

Article 3.30 (Consultations);

all the claims identified in the submission of the claim to the Tribunal made pursuant to
Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim) are based on the measure or measures identified in the
notice of intent to submit a claim made pursuant to Article 3.32 (Notice of Intent to Submit a
Claim); and

the conditions set out in Article 3.34 (Other Claims) are fulfilled.

This Article is without prejudice to other jurisdictional requirements arising from the relevant

dispute settlement rules.

EU/VN/IPA/en 69

1.

2.

ARTICLE 3.36

Consent

The respondent consents to the submission of a claim under this Section.

The claimant shall deliver its consent in accordance with the procedures provided for in this

Section at the time of submitting a claim pursuant to Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim).

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

The consent under paragraphs | and 2 requires that:

the disputing parties shall refrain from enforcing an award rendered pursuant to this Section

before such award has become final pursuant to Article 3.55 (Final Award); and

the disputing parties shall refrain from seeking to appeal, review, set aside, annul, revise or
initiate any other similar procedure before an international or domestic court or tribunal, as
regards an award pursuant to this Section.

The consent under paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of:

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Additional Facility Rules for written

consent of the disputing parties; and

Article II of the New York Convention of 1958 for an agreement in writing.

For greater certainty, this subparagraph applies in conjunction with Article 3.57 (Enforcement
of Final Awards).

EU/VN/IPA/en 70

ARTICLE 3.37

Third-Party Funding

1. Incase of third-party funding, the disputing party benefiting from it shall notify the other
disputing party and the division of the Tribunal, or where the division of the Tribunal is not
established, the President of the Tribunal the existence and nature of the funding arrangement, and

the name and address of the third party funder.

2. Such notification shall be made at the time of submission of a claim, or, when the financing
agreement is concluded or the donation or grant is made after the submission of a claim, without

delay as soon as the agreement is concluded or the donation or grant is made.

3. | When applying Article 3.48 (Security for Costs), the Tribunal shall take into account whether
there is third-party funding. When deciding on the cost of proceedings pursuant to paragraph 4 of
Article 3.53 (Provisional Award), the Tribunal shall take into account whether the requirements

provided for in paragraphs | and 2 of this Article have been respected.

EU/VN/IPA/en 71

SUB-SECTION 4

INVESTMENT TRIBUNAL SYSTEM

ARTICLE 3.38

Tribunal

1. A Tribunal is hereby established to hear claims submitted pursuant to

Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim).

2. Pursuant to subparagraph 5(a) of Article 4.1 (Committee), the Committee shall, upon the
entry into force of this Agreement, appoint nine Members of the Tribunal. Three of the Members
shall be nationals of a Member State of the Union, three shall be nationals of Viet Nam and three

shall be nationals of third countries.!

3. | The Committee may decide to increase or decrease the number of the Members of the
Tribunal by multiples of three. Additional appointments shall be made on the same basis as

provided for in paragraph 2.

Instead of proposing the appointment of three Members who have its nationality, either Party
may propose to appoint up to three Members who have other nationality. In this case, such
Members shall be considered to be nationals of the Party that proposed their appointment for
the purposes of this Article.

EU/VN/IPA/en 72

4. | The Members of the Tribunal shall possess the qualifications required in their respective
countries for appointment to judicial offices or be jurists of recognised competence. They shall have
demonstrated expertise in public international law. It is desirable that they have expertise, in
particular, in international investment law, international trade law and the resolution of disputes

arising under international investment or international trade agreements.

5. | The Members of the Tribunal shall be appointed for a four-year term, renewable once.
However, the terms of five of the nine persons appointed immediately after the date of entry into
force of this Agreement, to be determined by lot, shall extend to six years. Vacancies shall be filled
as they arise. A person appointed to replace a person whose term of office has not expired shall hold
office for the remainder of the predecessor's term. A person who is serving on a division of the
Tribunal when his or her term expires may, with the authorisation of the President of the Tribunal,
continue to serve on the division until the closure of the proceedings of that division and shall, for

that purpose only, be deemed to continue to be a Member of the Tribunal.

6. | The Tribunal shall hear cases in divisions consisting of three Members, of whom one shall be
a national of a Member State of the Union, one a national of Viet Nam and one a national of a third

country. The division shall be chaired by the Member who is a national of a third country.

7. Within 90 days of the submission of a claim pursuant to Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim),
the President of the Tribunal shall appoint the Members composing the division of the Tribunal
hearing the case on a rotation basis, ensuring that the composition of the divisions is random and

unpredictable, while giving equal opportunity to all Members to serve.

EU/VN/IPA/en 73

8. | The President and Vice-President of the Tribunal shall be responsible for organisational issues
and will be appointed for a two-year term and shall be drawn by lot from among the Members who
are nationals of third countries. They shall serve on the basis of a rotation drawn by lot by the co-
chairs of the Committee or their respective delegates. The Vice-President shall replace the President

when the President is unavailable.

9. Notwithstanding paragraph 6, the disputing parties may agree that a case be heard by a sole
Member who is a national of a third country, to be selected by the President of the Tribunal. The
respondent shall give sympathetic consideration to such a request from the claimant, in particular
where the claimant is a small or medium-sized enterprise or the compensation or damages claimed
are relatively low. Such a request should be made at the same time as the filing of the claim

pursuant to Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim).

10. The Tribunal may draw up its own working procedures. The working procedures shall be
compatible with the applicable dispute settlement rules and this Section. If the Tribunal decides to
do so, the President of the Tribunal shall draw up draft working procedures in consultation with the
other Members of the Tribunal and present the draft working procedures to the Committee The draft
working procedures shall be adopted by the Committee. If the draft working procedures are not
adopted by the Committee within three months of their presentation, the President of the Tribunal
shall make the necessary revision to the draft working procedures, taking into consideration the
views expressed by the Parties. The President of the Tribunal shall subsequently present the revised
draft working procedures to the Committee. The revised draft working procedures shall be
considered adopted unless the Committee decides to reject the revised draft working procedures

within three months of their presentation.

EU/VN/IPA/en 74

11. When a procedural question arises that is not covered by this Section, by any supplementing
rules adopted by the Committee or by the working procedures adopted pursuant to paragraph 10, the
relevant division of the Tribunal may adopt an appropriate procedure that is compatible with those

provisions.

12. A division of the Tribunal shall make every effort to take any decision by consensus. In case
that a decision cannot be reached by consensus, the division of the Tribunal shall render its decision
by a majority of votes of all its Members. Opinions expressed by individual Members of a division

of the Tribunal shall be anonymous.

13. The Members shall be available at all times and at short notice, and shall stay abreast of

dispute settlement activities under this Agreement.

14. In order to ensure their availability, the Members shall be paid a monthly retainer fee to be
fixed by decision of the Committee. In addition, the President of the Tribunal and the
Vice-President, where applicable, shall receive a daily fee equivalent to the fee determined pursuant
to paragraph 16 of Article 3.39 (Appeal Tribunal) for each day worked in fulfilling the functions of

President of the Tribunal pursuant to this Section.

15. The retainer fee and the daily fee referred to in paragraph 14 shall be paid by both Parties
taking into account their respective level of development into an account managed by the
Secretariat of ICSID. In the event that one Party fails to pay the retainer fee or the daily fee, the
other Party may elect to pay instead. Any such arrears will remain payable, with appropriate

interests.

EU/VN/IPA/en 75

16. Unless the Committee adopts a decision pursuant to paragraph 17, the amount of the other
fees and expenses of the Members of a division of the Tribunal shall be those determined pursuant
to Regulation 14(1) of the Administrative and Financial Regulations of the ICSID Convention in
force on the date of the submission of the claim and allocated by the Tribunal among the disputing

parties in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article 3.53 (Provisional Award).

17. Upon a decision by the Committee, the retainer fee, the daily fee and the other fees and
expenses may be permanently transformed into a regular salary. In such a case, the Members of the
Tribunal shall serve on a full-time basis and they shall not be permitted to engage in any
occupation, whether gainful or not, unless exemption is exceptionally granted by the President of

the Tribunal. The Committee shall fix their remuneration and related organisational matters.

18. The Secretariat of ICSID shall act as Secretariat for the Tribunal and provide it with

appropriate support. The expenses for such support shall be allocated by the Tribunal among the

disputing parties in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article 3.53 (Provisional Award).
ARTICLE 3.39

Appeal Tribunal

1. | A permanent Appeal Tribunal is hereby established to hear appeals from awards issued by the

Tribunal.

EU/VN/IPA/en 76

2. | The Appeal Tribunal shall be composed of six Members, of whom two shall be nationals of a
Member State of the Union, two shall be nationals of Viet Nam and two shall be nationals of third

countries.

3. Pursuant to subparagraph 5(a) of Article 4.1 (Committee), the Committee shall, upon entry
into force of this Agreement, appoint the six Members of the Appeal Tribunal.'

4. |The Committee may decide to increase or decrease the number of the Members of the Appeal
Tribunal by multiples of three. Additional appointments shall be made on the same basis as

provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3.

5. | The Appeal Tribunal Members shall be appointed for a four-year term, renewable once.
However, the terms of three of the six persons appointed immediately after the entry into force of
this Agreement, to be determined by lot, shall extend to six years. Vacancies shall be filled as they
arise. A person appointed to replace a person whose term of office has not expired shall hold office

for the remainder of the predecessor's term.

Instead of proposing the appointment of two Members who have its nationality or citizenship,
either Party may propose to appoint up to two Members who have other nationalities or
citizenship. In this case, such Members shall be considered to be nationals or citizens of the
Party that proposed his or her appointment for the purposes of this Article.

EU/VN/IPA/en 77

6. | The Appeal Tribunal shall have a President and Vice-President who shall be selected by lot
for a two-year term from the Members who are nationals of third countries. They shall serve on the
basis of a rotation drawn by lot by the Chair of the Committee. The Vice-President shall replace the

President when the President is unavailable.

7. The Members of the Appeal Tribunal shall have demonstrated expertise in public
international law, and possess the qualifications required in their respective countries for
appointment to the highest judicial offices or be jurists of recognised competence. It is desirable that
they have expertise in international investment law, international trade law and the resolution of

disputes arising under international investment or international trade agreements.

8. | The Appeal Tribunal shall hear appeals in divisions consisting of three Members of whom
one shall be a national of a Member State of the Union, one a national of Viet Nam and one a
national of a third country. The division shall be chaired by the Member who is a national of a third

country.

9. |The composition of the division hearing each appeal shall be established in each case by the
President of the Appeal Tribunal on a rotation basis, ensuring that the composition of each division
is random and unpredictable, while giving equal opportunity to all Members to serve. A person who
is Serving on a division of the Appeal Tribunal when his or her term expires may, with the
authorisation of the President of the Appeal Tribunal, continue to serve on the division until the
closure of the proceedings of that division and shall, for that purpose only, be deemed to continue to

be a Member of the Appeal Tribunal.

EU/VN/IPA/en 78

10. The Appeal Tribunal shall draw up its own working procedures. The working procedures
shall be compatible with this Section and the instructions provided in Annex 13 (Working
Procedures for the Appeal Tribunal). The President of the Appeal Tribunal shall draw up draft
working procedures in consultation with the other Members of the Appeal Tribunal and present the
draft working procedures to the Committee within one year of the date of the entry into force of this
Agreement. The draft working procedures shall be adopted by the Committee. If the draft working
procedures are not adopted by the Committee within three months of their presentation, the
President of the Appeal Tribunal shall make the necessary revision to the draft working procedures,
taking into consideration the views expressed by the Parties. The President of the Appeal Tribunal
shall subsequently present the revised draft working procedures to the Committee. The revised draft
working procedures shall be considered adopted, unless the Committee decides to reject the revised

draft working procedures within three months of their presentation.

11. When a procedural question arises that is not covered by this Section, by any supplementing
rules adopted by the Committee or by working procedures adopted pursuant to paragraph 10, the
relevant division of the Appeal Tribunal may adopt an appropriate procedure that is compatible with

those provisions.

12. A division of the Appeal Tribunal shall make every effort to take any decision by consensus.
In case that a decision cannot be reached by consensus, the division of the Appeal Tribunal shall
render its decision by a majority of votes of all its Members. Opinions expressed by individual

Members of a division of Appeal Tribunal shall be anonymous.

13. The Members of the Appeal Tribunal shall be available at all times and at short notice and

shall stay abreast of other dispute settlement activities under this Agreement.

EU/VN/IPA/en 79

14. The Members of the Appeal Tribunal shall be paid a monthly retainer fee to be determined by
decision of the Committee. In addition, the President of the Appeal Tribunal and the Vice-President,
where applicable, shall receive a daily fee equivalent to the fee determined pursuant to paragraph 16
for each day worked in fulfilling the functions of President of the Appeal Tribunal pursuant to this

Section.

15. The retainer fee and the daily fee referred to in paragraph 14 shall be paid by both Parties
taking into account their respective level of development into an account managed by the
Secretariat of ICSID. In the event that one Party fails to pay the retainer fee or the daily fee, the
other Party may elect to pay instead. Any such arrears will remain payable, with appropriate

interests.

16. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, the Committee shall adopt a decision determining
the amount of the other fees and expenses of the Members of a division of the Appeal Tribunal.
Such fees and expenses shall be allocated by the Tribunal, or where applicable by the Appeal
Tribunal, among the disputing parties in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article 3.53 (Provisional

Award).

17. Upon decision by the Committee, the retainer fee, the daily fee and the other fees and
expenses may be permanently transformed into a regular salary. In such a case, the Members of the
Appeal Tribunal shall serve on a full-time basis and they shall not be permitted to engage in any
occupation, whether gainful or not, unless exemption is exceptionally granted by the President of

the Appeal Tribunal. The Committee shall fix their remuneration and related organisational matters.

EU/VN/IPA/en 80

18. The Secretariat of ICSID shall act as Secretariat for the Appeal Tribunal and provide it with
appropriate support. The expenses for such support shall be allocated by the Appeal Tribunal

among the disputing parties in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article 3.53 (Provisional Award).

ARTICLE 3.40
Ethics

1. |The Members of the Tribunal and of the Appeal Tribunal shall be chosen from persons whose
independence is beyond doubt. They shall not be affiliated with any government.' They shall not
take instructions from any government or organisation with regard to matters relating to the dispute.
They shall not participate in the consideration of any disputes that would create a direct or indirect
conflict of interest. In doing so, they shall comply with Annex 11 (Code of Conduct for Members of
the Tribunal, Members of the Appeal Tribunal and Mediators). In addition, upon appointment, they
shall refrain from acting as counsel or as party-appointed experts or witnesses in any pending or
new investment protection dispute under this or any other agreement or under domestic laws and

regulations.

For greater certainty, the fact that a person receives an income from the government, or was
formerly employed by the government, or has family relationship with a person who receives
an income from the government, does not in itself render that person ineligible.

EU/VN/IPA/en 81

2. If a disputing party considers that a Member has a conflict of interest, it shall send a notice of
challenge to the appointment to the President of the Tribunal or to the President of the Appeal
Tribunal, accordingly. The notice of challenge shall be sent within 15 days of the date on which the
composition of the division of the Tribunal or of the Appeal Tribunal has been communicated to the
disputing party, or within 15 days of the date on which the relevant facts came to its knowledge if
they could not have reasonably been known at the time of composition of the division. The notice of

challenge shall state the grounds for the challenge.

3.  If, within 15 days of the date of the notice of challenge, the challenged Member has elected
not to resign from that division, the President of the Tribunal or the President of the Appeal
Tribunal, accordingly, shall, after hearing the disputing parties and after providing the Member an
opportunity to submit any observations, issue a decision within 45 days of the receipt of the notice

of challenge and notify forthwith the disputing parties and other Members of the division.

4. Challenges against the appointment of the President of the Tribunal to a division shall be
decided by the President of the Appeal Tribunal and vice versa.

5. | Upon a reasoned recommendation from the President of the Appeal Tribunal, or on their joint
initiative, the Parties may by decision of the Committee decide to remove a Member from the
Tribunal or a Member from the Appeal Tribunal where the behaviour of this Member is inconsistent
with the obligations set out in paragraph 1 and incompatible with his continued membership of the
Tribunal or the Appeal Tribunal. If the President of the Appeal Tribunal is alleged of such
behaviour, the President of the Tribunal shall submit the reasoned recommendation. Paragraph 2 of
Article 3.38 (Tribunal) and paragraph 3 of Article 3.39 (Appeal Tribunal) shall apply

mutatis mutandis for filling vacancies that may arise pursuant to this paragraph.

EU/VN/IPA/en 82

ARTICLE 3.41
Multilateral Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
The Parties shall enter into negotiations for an international agreement providing for a multilateral
investment tribunal in combination with, or separate from, a multilateral appellate mechanism
applicable to disputes under this Agreement. The Parties may consequently agree on the
non-application of relevant parts of this Section. The Committee may adopt a decision specifying
any necessary transitional arrangements.

SUB-SECTION 5

CONDUCT OF PROCEEDINGS

ARTICLE 3.42

Applicable Law and Rules of Interpretation

1. | The Tribunal and the Appeal Tribunal shall decide whether the measures subject to the claim

are in breach of with the provisions of Chapter 2 (Investment Protection) as alleged by the claimant.

EU/VN/IPA/en 83

2. | When rendering its decisions, the Tribunal and the Appeal Tribunal shall apply the provisions
of Chapter 2 (Investment Protection) and other provisions of this Agreement, as applicable, as well
as other rules or principles of international law applicable between the Parties, and take into

consideration, as matter of fact, any relevant domestic law of the disputing Party.

3. For greater certainty, the Tribunal and the Appeal Tribunal shall be bound by the
interpretation given to the domestic law by the courts or authorities which are competent to interpret
the relevant domestic law, and any meaning given to the relevant domestic law made by the
Tribunal and the Appeal Tribunal shall not be binding upon the courts and the authorities of either
Party. The Tribunal and the Appeal Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to determine the legality of
a measure, alleged to constitute a breach of this Agreement, under the domestic laws and

regulations of the disputing Party.

4. The Tribunal and the Appeal Tribunal shall interpret this Agreement in accordance with
customary rules of interpretation of public international law, as codified in the Vienna Convention

on the Law of Treaties, concluded at Vienna on 23 May 1969.

5. | When serious concerns arise as regards issues of interpretation which may affect matters
relating to this Section, the Committee may adopt interpretations of provisions of this Agreement.
Any such interpretation shall be binding upon the Tribunal and the Appeal Tribunal. The

Committee may decide that an interpretation shall have binding effect from a specific date.

EU/VN/IPA/en 84

ARTICLE 3.43

Anti-Circumvention

For greater certainty, the Tribunal shall decline jurisdiction where the dispute had arisen, or was
foreseeable on the basis of a high degree of probability, at the time when the claimant acquired
ownership or control of the investment subject to the dispute and the Tribunal determines, on the
basis of the facts of the case, that the claimant has acquired ownership or control of the investment
for the main purpose of submitting the claim under this Section. The possibility to decline
jurisdiction in such circumstances is without prejudice to other jurisdictional objections which

could be entertained by the Tribunal.
ARTICLE 3.44
Preliminary Objections
1. | The respondent may file an objection that a claim is manifestly without legal merit, no later
than 30 days after the constitution of the division of the Tribunal pursuant to paragraph 7 of

Article 3.38 (Tribunal), and in any event before the first session of the division of the Tribunal, or

30 days after the respondent became aware of the facts on which the objection is based.

EU/VN/IPA/en 85

2. The respondent shall specify as precisely as possible the basis for the objection.

3. The Tribunal, after giving the disputing parties an opportunity to present their observations on
the objection, shall, at the first meeting of the division of the Tribunal or promptly thereafter, issue a
decision or provisional award on the objection, stating the grounds therefor. If the objection is
received after the first meeting of the division of the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall issue such decision
or provisional award as soon as possible, and no later than 120 days after the objection was filed.
When issuing the decision the Tribunal shall assume the alleged facts to be true, and may also

consider any relevant facts not in dispute.

4. The decision of the Tribunal shall be without prejudice to the right of a disputing party to
object, pursuant to Article 3.45 (Claims Unfounded as a Matter of Law) or in the course of the
proceedings, to the legal merits of a claim and without prejudice to a Tribunal's authority to address
other objections as a preliminary question. For greater certainty, such objection may include an
objection that the dispute or any ancillary claim is not within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal or, for

other reasons, is not within the competence of the Tribunal.

EU/VN/IPA/en 86

ARTICLE 3.45

Claims Unfounded as a Matter of Law

1. | Without prejudice to the Tribunal's authority to address other objections as a preliminary
question, such as an objection that the dispute or any ancillary claim is not within the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal or, for other reasons, is not within the competence of the Tribunal, and without
prejudice to a respondent's right to raise any such objections at any appropriate time, the Tribunal
shall decide as a preliminary question any objection by the respondent that, as a matter of law, a
claim, or any part thereof, submitted under this Section is not a claim for which an award in favour
of the claimant may be made under Article 3.53 (Provisional Award), even if the facts alleged were

assumed to be true. The Tribunal may also consider any relevant facts not in dispute.

2. | An objection under paragraph 1 shall be submitted to the Tribunal as soon as possible after
the division of the Tribunal is constituted, and in no event later than the date the Tribunal fixes for
the respondent to submit its counter-memorial or statement of defence or, in the case of an
amendment to the claim, the date the Tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its response to the
amendment. This objection shall not be submitted as long as proceedings under

Article 3.44 (Preliminary Objections) are pending, unless the Tribunal grants leave to file an

objection under this Article, after having taken due account of the circumstances of the case.

EU/VN/IPA/en 87

3. Upon receipt of an objection under paragraph 1, and unless it considers the objection
manifestly unfounded, the Tribunal shall suspend any proceedings on the merits, establish a
schedule for considering the objection consistent with any schedule it has established for
considering any other preliminary question, and issue a decision or provisional award on the

objection, stating the grounds therefore.

ARTICLE 3.46

Transparency of Proceedings

1. |The UNCITRAL Transparency Rules apply to disputes under this Section, subject to
paragraphs 2 to 8.

2. The request for consultations under Article 3.30 (Consultations), the notice of intent under
paragraph 1 of Article 3.32 (Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim), the determination under
paragraph 2 of Article 3.32 (Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim), the notice of challenge and the
decision on this challenge under Article 3.40 (Ethics) and the request for consolidation under
Article 3.59 (Consolidation) shall be included in the list of documents referred to in Article 3(1) of
the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules.

EU/VN/IPA/en 88

3. Subject to Article 7 of the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules, the Tribunal may decide, on its
own initiative or upon request from any person, and after consultation with the disputing parties,
whether and how to make available any other documents provided to, or issued by, the Tribunal not
falling within Article 3(1) and 3(2) of the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules. This may include

exhibits when the respondent so agrees.

4. Notwithstanding Article 2 of the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules, the Union or Viet Nam, as
the case may be, shall, after receiving the relevant documents pursuant to paragraph 2 of this
Article, promptly transmit those documents to the non-disputing Party and make them publicly

available, subject to the redaction of confidential or protected information.

5. | Documents referred to in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 may be made publicly available by

communication to the repository referred to in the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules or otherwise.

6. No later than three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Committee
shall review the operation of paragraph 3. Upon request of either Party, the Committee may adopt a
decision pursuant to subparagraph 5(c) of Article 4.1 (Committee) stipulating of Article 3(3) of the
UNCITRAL Transparency Rules shall apply instead of paragraph 3 of this Article.

' For greater certainty, confidential or protected information, as defined in Article 7(2) of the

UNCITRAL Transparency Rules, includes classified government information.

EU/VN/IPA/en 89

7. Subject to any decision by the Tribunal on an objection regarding the designation of
information claimed to be confidential or protected information, neither the disputing parties nor the
Tribunal shall disclose to any non-disputing Party or to the public any protected information where

the disputing party that provided the information clearly designates it as such.!

8. A disputing party may disclose to other persons in connection with proceedings, including
witnesses and experts, such unredacted documents as it considers necessary in the course of
proceedings under this Section. However, the disputing party shall ensure that those persons protect

the confidential or protected information in those documents.

For greater certainty, where a disputing party that submitted the information decides to
withdraw all or parts of its submission containing such information in accordance with
Article 7(4) of the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules, the other disputing party shall, whenever
necessary, resubmit complete and redacted documents which either remove the information
withdrawn by the disputing party that first submitted the information or redesignate the
information consistent with the designation of the disputing party that first submitted the
information.

EU/VN/IPA/en 90

ARTICLE 3.47

Interim Decisions

The Tribunal may order an interim measure of protection to preserve the rights of a disputing party
or to ensure that the Tribunal's jurisdiction is made fully effective, including an order to preserve
evidence in the possession or control of a disputing party or to protect the Tribunal's jurisdiction.
The Tribunal may neither order the seizure of assets nor prevent the application of the treatment

alleged to constitute a breach. For the purposes of this paragraph, an order includes a

recommendation.
ARTICLE 3.48
Security for Costs
1. For greater certainty, the Tribunal may, upon request, order the claimant to provide security

for all or a part of the costs if there are reasonable grounds to believe that the claimant risks not

being able to honour a possible decision on costs issued against the claimant.
2. If the security for costs is not provided in full within 30 days of the Tribunal's order, or within

any other time period set by the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall so inform the disputing parties. The

Tribunal may order the suspension or termination of the proceedings.

EU/VN/IPA/en 91

ARTICLE 3.49

Discontinuance
If the claimant, following the submission of a claim under this Section, fails to take any steps in the
proceedings during 180 consecutive days or such periods as the disputing parties may agree, the
claimant shall be deemed to have withdrawn its claim and to have discontinued the proceedings.
The Tribunal shall, at the request of the respondent and after notice to the disputing parties, take
note of the discontinuance of the proceedings in an order and issue an award on costs. After such an
order has been rendered the authority of the Tribunal shall lapse. The claimant may not
subsequently submit a claim on the same matter.

ARTICLE 3.50

Language of the Proceedings

1. The disputing parties shall agree on the language to be used in the proceedings.

EU/VN/IPA/en 92

2. If the disputing parties have not reached an agreement pursuant to paragraph 1 within 30 days
of the constitution of the division of the Tribunal pursuant to paragraph 7 of Article 3.38 (Tribunal),
the Tribunal shall determine the language to be used in the proceedings. The Tribunal shall make its
determination after consulting the disputing parties with a view to ensuring the economic efficiency
of the proceedings and ensuring that the determination does not impose any unnecessary burden on

the resources of the disputing parties and of the Tribunal.'

ARTICLE 3.51

The Non-Disputing Party

1. | The respondent shall, within 30 days of the receipt of any documents referred in
subparagraphs (a) and (b) or promptly after any dispute concerning confidential or protected

information has been resolved, provide the non-disputing Party:

(a) the request for consultations referred to in Article 3.30 (Consultations), the notice of intent
under paragraph 1 of Article 3.32 (Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim), the determination
under paragraph 2 of Article 3.32 (Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim) and the claim referred
to in Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim); and

' In considering the economic efficiency of the proceedings, the Tribunal should take into

account the costs of the disputing parties and of the Tribunal in processing case-law and legal
writings which will potentially be submitted by the disputing parties.

EU/VN/IPA/en 93

(b) upon request, any documents that are made available to the public in accordance with

Article 3.46 (Transparency of Proceedings).

2. The non-disputing Party has the right to attend hearings held under this Section and to make
oral representations relating to the interpretation of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 3.52
Expert Reports
The Tribunal, at the request of a disputing party or, after consulting the disputing parties, on its own
initiative, may appoint one or more experts to report to it in writing on any factual issue concerning
environmental, health, safety, or other matters raised by a disputing party in the proceedings.
ARTICLE 3.53
Provisional Award
1. Where the Tribunal concludes that a measure in dispute breaches any of the provisions of
Chapter 2 (Investment Protection), the Tribunal may, on the basis of a request from the claimant

and after hearing the disputing parties, award, separately or in combination, only:

(a) monetary damages and any applicable interest; and

EU/VN/IPA/en 94

(b) restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that the respondent may pay
monetary damages and any applicable interest in lieu of restitution, determined in a manner

consistent with the relevant provisions of Chapter 2 (Investment Protection).

Where the claim was submitted on behalf of a locally-established company, any award under this

paragraph shall provide that:

(a) monetary damages and any applicable interest shall be paid to the locally established

company; and
(b) any restitution shall be made to the locally established company.
The Tribunal may not order the repeal of the treatment concerned.
2. Monetary damages shall not be greater than the loss suffered by the claimant or, as applicable,
by its locally established company, as a result of the breach of any of the provisions of
Chapter 2 (Investment Protection), reduced by any prior damages or compensation already provided
by the Party concerned. For greater certainty, when an investor submits a claim on its own behalf,
the investor may recover only loss or damage that the investor has incurred with regards to the

covered investment of that investor.

3. The Tribunal may not award punitive damages.

EU/VN/IPA/en 95

4. The Tribunal shall order that the costs of the proceedings be borne by the unsuccessful
disputing party. In exceptional circumstances, the Tribunal may apportion costs between the
disputing parties if it determines that apportionment is appropriate in the circumstances of the case.
Other reasonable costs, including reasonable costs of legal representation and assistance, shall be
borne by the unsuccessful disputing party, unless the Tribunal determines that such apportionment
is unreasonable in the circumstances of the case. Where only some parts of the claims have been
successful the costs shall be adjusted, proportionately, to the number or extent of the successful

parts of the claims. The Appeal Tribunal shall deal with costs in accordance with this Article.

5. | The Committee may adopt supplementing rules on fees for the purposes of determining the
maximum amount of costs of legal representation and assistance that may be borne by specific
categories of unsuccessful disputing parties. Such supplementing rules shall take into account the
financial resources of a claimant who is a natural person or a small or medium-sized enterprise. The
Committee shall endeavour to adopt such supplementing rules no later than one year after the date

of entry into force of this Agreement.

6. The Tribunal shall issue a provisional award within 18 months of the date of submission of
the claim. If that deadline cannot be respected, the Tribunal shall adopt a decision to that effect,

which shall specify the reasons for such delay.

' For greater certainty, the term "costs of the proceedings" includes (a) the reasonable costs of

expert advice and of other assistance required by the Tribunal, and (b) the reasonable travel
and other expenses of witnesses to the extent such expenses are approved by the Tribunal.

EU/VN/IPA/en 96

ARTICLE 3.54

Appeal Procedure

1. Either disputing party may appeal a provisional award before the Appeal Tribunal, within 90

days of its issuance. The grounds for appeal are:

(a) that the Tribunal has erred in the interpretation or application of the applicable law;

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly erred in the appreciation of the facts, including the

appreciation of relevant domestic law; or

(c) those provided for in Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, in so far as they are not covered by
subparagraphs (a) and (b).

2. The Appeal Tribunal shall dismiss the appeal where it finds that the appeal is unfounded. It
may also dismiss the appeal on an expedited basis where it is clear that the appeal is manifestly

unfounded.

3. If the Appeal Tribunal finds that the appeal is well founded, the decision of the Appeal
Tribunal shall modify or reverse the legal findings and conclusions in the provisional award in
whole or part. Its decision shall specify precisely how it has modified or reversed the relevant

findings and conclusions of the Tribunal.

EU/VN/IPA/en 97

4. Where the facts established by the Tribunal so permit, the Appeal Tribunal shall apply its own
legal findings and conclusions to such facts and render a final decision. If that is not possible, it

shall refer the matter back to the Tribunal.

5. Asa general rule, the appeal proceedings shall not exceed 180 days calculated from the date
on which a party to the dispute formally notifies its decision to appeal to the date on which the
Appeal Tribunal issues its decision. When the Appeal Tribunal considers that it cannot issue its
decision within 180 days, it shall inform the disputing parties in writing of the reasons for the delay
together with an estimate of the period within which it will issue its decision. Unless exceptional

circumstances so require, the proceedings shall in no case exceed 270 days.

6. A disputing party lodging an appeal shall provide security, including the costs of appeal, as
well as a reasonable amount to be determined by the Appeal Tribunal in light of the circumstances

of the case.

7. Articles 3.37 (Third-Party Funding), 3.46 (Transparency of Proceedings), 3.47 (Interim
Decisions), 3.49 (Discontinuance), 3.51 (The Non-Disputing Party), Article 3.53 (Provisional
Award) and 3.56 (Indemnification or Other Compensation) apply in respect of the appeal

procedure, mutatis mutandis.

EU/VN/IPA/en 98

ARTICLE 3.55

Final Award

1. | A provisional award issued pursuant to this Section shall become final if neither disputing
party has appealed the provisional award pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 3.54 (Appeal

Procedure).

2. | When a provisional award has been appealed and the Appeal Tribunal has dismissed the
appeal pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 3.54 (Appeal Procedure), the provisional award shall
become final on the date of dismissal of the appeal by the Appeal Tribunal.

3. | When a provisional award has been appealed and the Appeal Tribunal has rendered a final
decision, the provisional award as modified or reversed by the Appeal Tribunal shall become final

on the date of the issuance of the final decision of the Appeal Tribunal.

4. | When a provisional award has been appealed and the Appeal Tribunal has modified or
reversed the legal findings and conclusions of the provisional award and referred the matter back to
the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall, after hearing the disputing parties if appropriate, revise its
provisional award to reflect the findings and conclusions of the Appeal Tribunal. The Tribunal shall
be bound by the findings made by the Appeal Tribunal. The Tribunal shall seek to issue its revised
award within 90 days of receiving the decision of the Appeal Tribunal. The revised provisional

award will become final 90 days after its issuance.

EU/VN/IPA/en 99

5. For the purposes of this Section, the term "final award" includes any final decision of the

Appeal Tribunal rendered pursuant to paragraph 4 of Article 3.54 (Appeal Procedure).

ARTICLE 3.56

Indemnification or Other Compensation

The Tribunal shall not accept as a valid defence, counterclaim, set-off or similar claim the fact that

the investor has received or will receive indemnification or other compensation pursuant to an

insurance or a guarantee contract in respect of all or part of the compensation sought in a dispute

initiated pursuant to this Section.

ARTICLE 3.57

Enforcement of Final Awards

1. Final awards issued pursuant to this Section:

(a) shall be binding between the disputing parties and in respect of that particular case; and

(b) shall not be subject to appeal, review, set aside, annulment or any other remedy.

EU/VN/IPA/en 100

2. Each Party shall recognise a final award rendered pursuant to this Section as binding and
enforce the pecuniary obligation within its territory as if it were a final judgment of a court in that

Party.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs | and 2, during the period referred to in paragraph 4, the
recognition and enforcement of a final award in respect of a dispute where Viet Nam is the
respondent shall be conducted pursuant to the New York Convention of 1958. During that time,
subparagraph 1(b) of this Article and subparagraph 3(b) of Article 3.36 (Consent) do not apply to

disputes where Viet Nam is the respondent.

4. In respect of a final award where Viet Nam is the respondent, subparagraph 1(b) and
paragraph 2 apply after a period of five years following the date of entry into force of this

Agreement, or a longer period determined by the Committee should the conditions warrant it.

5. The execution of the award shall be governed by the laws concerning the execution of

judgments or awards in force where such execution is sought.

6. For greater certainty, Article 4.14 (No Direct Effect) shall not prevent the recognition,

execution and enforcement of awards rendered pursuant to this Section.
7. For the purposes of Article 1 of the New York Convention of 1958, final awards issued

pursuant to this Section shall be deemed to be arbitral awards and to relate to claims arising out of a

commercial relationship or transaction.

EU/VN/IPA/en 101

8. For greater certainty and subject to subparagraph 1(b), where a claim has been submitted to
dispute settlement pursuant to subparagraph 2(a) of Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim), a final
award issued pursuant to this Section shall qualify as an award under Section 6 of Chapter IV of the

ICSID Convention.

ARTICLE 3.58

Role of the Parties to the Agreement

1. The Parties shall not give diplomatic protection, or bring an international claim, in respect of
a dispute submitted under this Section, unless the other Party has failed to abide by and comply

with the award rendered in such dispute. Diplomatic protection, for the purposes of this paragraph,
shall not include informal diplomatic exchanges for the sole purpose of facilitating a settlement of

the dispute.

2. Paragraph | shall not exclude the possibility of dispute settlement under

Section A (Resolution of Disputes between Parties) in respect of a measure of general application if
that measure is alleged to have breached the Agreement and in respect of which a dispute has been
initiated with regard to a specific investment pursuant to Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim). This
is without prejudice to Article 3.51 (The Non-Disputing Party) or Article 5 of the UNCITRAL

Transparency Rules.

EU/VN/IPA/en 102

ARTICLE 3.59

Consolidation

1. Incase that two or more claims submitted under this Section have a question of law or fact in
common and arise out of the same events and circumstances, the respondent may submit to the
President of the Tribunal a request for the consolidation of such claims or part thereof. The request

shall stipulate:

(a) the names and addresses of the disputing parties to the claims sought to be consolidated;

(b) the scope of the consolidation sought; and

(c) the grounds for the request.

The respondent shall deliver the request to each claimant in a claim which the respondent seeks to

consolidate.

2.  If all disputing parties to the claims sought to be consolidated agree to the consolidation of the
claims, the disputing parties shall submit a joint request to the President of the Tribunal pursuant to
paragraph |. The President of the Tribunal shall, after receipt of such joint request, constitute a new
division of the Tribunal pursuant to Article 3.38 (Tribunal) (hereinafter referred to as the
"consolidating division") which shall have jurisdiction over all or part of the claims which are

subject to the joint consolidation request.

EU/VN/IPA/en 103

3. If the disputing parties referred to in paragraph 2 have not reached an agreement on
consolidation within 30 days of the receipt of the request for consolidation referred to in
paragraph | by the last claimant to receive it, the President of the Tribunal shall constitute a
consolidating division pursuant to Article 3.38 (Tribunal). The consolidating division shall assume
jurisdiction over all or part of the claims if, after considering the views of the disputing parties, it
decides that doing so would best serve the interest of a fair and efficient resolution of the claims,

including the interest of consistency of awards.

4. The consolidating division shall conduct its proceedings under the dispute settlement rules
chosen by agreement of the claimants from those referred to in paragraph 2 of

Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim).

5. If the claimants have not agreed upon the dispute settlement rules within 30 days of the date
of receipt of the request for consolidation by the last claimant to receive it, the consolidating

division shall conduct its proceedings in accordance with the arbitration rules of UNCITRAL.

6. Divisions of the Tribunal constituted under Article 3.38 (Tribunal) shall cede jurisdiction in
relation to the claims, or parts thereof, over which the consolidating division has jurisdiction and the
proceedings of such divisions shall be stayed or adjourned, as appropriate. The award of the
consolidating division in relation to the parts of the claims over which it has assumed jurisdiction
shall be binding on the divisions which have jurisdiction over the remainder of the claims, as of the

date the award becomes final pursuant to Article 3.55 (Final Award).

EU/VN/IPA/en 104

7. A claimant may withdraw the claim or a part thereof subject to consolidation from dispute
settlement proceedings under this Article and such claim or part thereof may not be resubmitted

under Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim).

8. At the request of the respondent, the consolidating division, on the same basis and with the
same effect as set out in paragraphs 3 and 6, may decide whether to assume jurisdiction over all or
part of a claim falling within the scope of paragraph | which is submitted after the initiation of
consolidation proceedings.

9. At the request of one of the claimants, the consolidating division may take appropriate
measures in order to preserve the confidentiality of protected information of that claimant vis-d-vis
other claimants. Such measures may include the submission of redacted versions of documents
containing protected information to the other claimants or arrangements to hold parts of the hearing
in private.

CHAPTER 4

INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 4.1

Committee

1. | The Parties hereby establish a Committee comprising representatives of the EU Party and
Viet Nam.

EU/VN/IPA/en 105

2.

The Committee shall meet once a year, unless otherwise decided by the Committee, or in

urgent cases at the request of either Party. The meetings of the Committee shall take place

alternately in the Union and Viet Nam, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties. The Committee shall

be co-chaired by the Minister of Planning and Investment of Viet Nam and the Member of the

European Commission responsible for trade, or their respective delegates. The Committee shall

agree on its meeting schedule and set its agenda.

3.

(a)

(b)

(d)

(e)

The Committee shall:

ensure the proper operation of this Agreement;

supervise and facilitate the implementation and application of this Agreement, and further its

general aims;

consider issues regarding this Chapter that are referred to it by a Party;

examine difficulties which may arise in the implementation of Section B (Resolution of

Disputes between Investors and Parties) of Chapter 3 (Dispute Settlement);
consider possible improvements of Section B (Resolution of Disputes between Investors and

Parties) of Chapter 3 (Dispute Settlement), in particular in the light of experience and

developments in other international fora;

EU/VN/IPA/en 106

(f)

(g)

(h)

(a)

(b)

upon request of either Party, examine the implementation of any mutually agreed solution as
regards a dispute under Section B (Resolution of Disputes between Investors and Parties) of

Chapter 3 (Dispute Settlement);

examine draft working procedures drawn up by the President of the Tribunal or of the Appeal
Tribunal pursuant to paragraph 10 of Article 3.38 (Tribunal) and paragraph 10 of

Article 3.39 (Appeal Tribunal);

without prejudice to Chapter 3 (Dispute Settlement), seek to solve problems which might
arise in areas covered by this Agreement, or resolve disputes that may arise regarding the
interpretation or application of this Agreement; and

consider any other matter of interest relating to areas covered by this Agreement.

The Committee may, in accordance with the relevant provisions of this Agreement:

communicate on issues falling under the scope of this Agreement with all interested parties,

including the private sector, social partners, and civil society organisations;

consider and recommend to the Parties amendments to this Agreement or, in cases

specifically provided for in this Agreement, amend by decision provisions of this Agreement;

EU/VN/IPA/en 107

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

5.

adopt interpretations of the provisions of this Agreement, including pursuant to paragraph 4 of
Article 3.42 (Applicable Law and Rules of Interpretation) which shall be binding on the
Parties and all bodies set up under this Agreement, including arbitration panels referred to in
Section A (Resolution of Disputes between Parties) of Chapter 3 (Dispute Settlement) and the
tribunals established under Section B (Resolution of Disputes between Investors and Parties)

of Chapter 3 (Dispute Settlement);

adopt decisions or make recommendations as envisaged by this Agreement;

adopt its own rules of procedure;

take any other action in the exercise of its functions in accordance with this Agreement.

The Committee may, in accordance with the relevant provisions of this Agreement and after

completion of the respective legal requirements and procedures of the Parties:

(a)

adopt decisions to appoint the Members of the Tribunal and the Members of the Appeal
Tribunal pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 3.38 (Tribunal) and paragraph 3 of

Article 3.39 (Appeal Tribunal); increase or decrease the number of Members pursuant to
paragraph 3 of Article 3.38 (Tribunal) and paragraph 4 of Article 3.39 (Appeal Tribunal); and
remove a Member from the Tribunal or the Appeal Tribunal pursuant to paragraph 5 of

Article 3.40 (Ethics);

EU/VN/IPA/en 108

(b)

(c)

(d)

(f)

(g)

adopt and subsequently amend rules supplementing the applicable dispute settlement rules as
referred to in paragraph 4 of Article 3.33 (Submission of a Claim); such rules and

amendments shall be binding on the Tribunal and the Appeal Tribunal;

adopt a decision stipulating that Article 3(3) of the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules shall
apply instead of paragraph 3 of Article 3.46 (Transparency of Proceedings);

fix the amount of the retainer fee referred to in paragraph 14 of Article 3.38 (Tribunal) and
paragraph 14 of Article 3.39 (Appeal Tribunal) as well as the other fees and expenses of the
Members of a division of the Appeal Tribunal and of the Presidents of the Tribunal and of the
Appeal Tribunal pursuant to paragraphs 14 and 16 of Article 8.28 (Tribunal) and

paragraphs 14 and 16 of Article 3.39 (Appeal Tribunal);

transform the retainer fee and other fees and expenses of the Members of the Tribunal and of
the Appeal Tribunal into a regular salary pursuant to paragraph 17 of Article 3.38 (Tribunal)
and paragraph 17 of Article 3.39 (Appeal Tribunal);

adopt or reject the draft working procedures of the Tribunal or of the Appeal Tribunal
pursuant to paragraph 10 of Article 3.38 (Tribunal) and paragraph 10 of Article 3.39 (Appeal

Tribunal);

adopt a decision specifying any necessary transitional arrangements pursuant to

Article 3.41 (Multilateral Dispute Settlement Mechanisms); and

EU/VN/IPA/en 109

(h) adopt supplemental rules on fees pursuant to paragraph 5 of Article 3.53 (Provisional Award).

ARTICLE 4.2
Decision-Making by the Committee
1. |The Committee shall, for the purpose of attaining the objectives of this Agreement, have the
power to take decisions, where provided for in this Agreement. The decisions taken shall be binding

on the Parties, which shall take the measures necessary for the implementation of those decisions.

2. The Committee may make appropriate recommendations to the Parties.

3. All decisions and recommendations of the Committee shall be made by mutual consent.
ARTICLE 4.3
Amendments

1. | The Parties may amend this Agreement. An amendment shall enter into force after the Parties

exchange written notifications certifying that they have completed their respective applicable legal

procedures as provided for in Article 4.9 (Entry into Force).

EU/VN/IPA/en 110

2. Notwithstanding paragraph | and where provided for in this Agreement, the Parties may
adopt in the Committee a decision amending this Agreement. This is without prejudice to the

completion of each Party's applicable legal procedures.

ARTICLE 4.4

Taxation

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of either the Union or one of
its Member States or Viet Nam under any tax agreement between any Member State of the Union
and Viet Nam. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any tax agreement,

that tax agreement shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as preventing the Parties from distinguishing, in
the application of the relevant provisions of their fiscal legislation, between taxpayers who are not
in the same situation, in particular with regard to their place of residence or with regard to the place

where their capital is invested.
3. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as preventing the adoption or enforcement of

any measure aimed at preventing the avoidance or evasion of taxes pursuant to the tax provisions of

agreements to avoid double taxation or other tax arrangements or domestic fiscal legislation.

EU/VN/IPA/en 111

ARTICLE 4.5

Prudential Carve-Out

1. | Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as preventing a Party from adopting or

maintaining measures for prudential reasons, such as:

(a) the protection of investors, depositors, policy-holders or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is

owed by a financial service supplier; or

(b) ensuring the integrity and stability of a Party's financial system.

2. The measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall not be more burdensome than necessary to

achieve their aim.
3. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as requiring a Party to disclose information

relating to the affairs and accounts of individual consumers or any confidential or proprietary

information in the possession of public entities.

EU/VN/IPA/en 112

ARTICLE 4.6
General Exceptions

Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a
means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where like conditions prevail,
or a disguised restriction on covered investment, nothing in Articles 2.3 (National Treatment) and
2.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) shall be construed as preventing the adoption or
enforcement by any Party of measures:
(a) necessary to protect public security or public morals or to maintain public order;
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
(c) relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such measures are applied in

conjunction with restrictions on domestic investors or on the domestic supply or consumption

of services;

(d) necessary for the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological value;

EU/VN/IPA/en 113

(e)

necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not inconsistent with
Articles 2.3 (National Treatment) and 2.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) including those

relating to:

(i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with the effects of a

default on contracts;

(ii) | the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing and
dissemination of personal data and the protection of confidentiality of individual records
and accounts; or

(iii) safety;

or

EU/VN/IPA/en 114

(f)

inconsistent with paragraph 1 of Article 2.3 (National Treatment) provided that the difference

in treatment is aimed at ensuring the effective or equitable imposition or collection of direct

taxes in respect of economic activities or investors of the other Party .

Measures that are aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or collection of
direct taxes include measures taken by a Party under its taxation system which:

(1)

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

(v)

(vi)

apply to non-resident investors and services suppliers in recognition of the fact that the
tax obligation of non-residents is determined with respect to taxable items sourced or
located in the Party's territory;

apply to non-residents in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes in the
Party's territory;

apply to non-residents or residents in order to prevent the avoidance or evasion of taxes,
including compliance measures;

apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the territory of another Party in order
to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes on such consumers derived from sources
in the Party's territory;

distinguish investors and service suppliers subject to tax on worldwide taxable items
from other investors and service suppliers, in recognition of the difference in the nature
of the tax base between them; or

determine, allocate or apportion income, profit, gain, loss, deduction or credit of
resident persons or branches, or between related persons or branches of the same
person, in order to safeguard the Party's tax base.

Tax terms or concepts in point (f) and in this footnote are determined according to tax
definitions and concepts, or equivalent or similar definitions and concepts, under the domestic
laws and regulations of the Party taking the measure.

EU/VN/IPA/en 115

ARTICLE 4.7

Specific Exceptions

Nothing in Chapter 2 (Investment Protection) shall apply to non-discriminatory measures of general

application taken by any public entity in pursuit of monetary policy or exchange rate policy. This

Article shall not affect a Party's obligations under Article 2.8 (Transfer).

ARTICLE 4.8

Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as:

(a) requiring a Party to furnish information, the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its

essential security interests;

(b) preventing a Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for the protection of its

essential security interests:
(i) connected with the production of or trade in arms, munitions and war materials and

relating to traffic in other goods and materials and to economic activities carried out

directly or indirectly for the purpose of provisioning a military establishment;

EU/VN/IPA/en 116

(ii) relating to the supply of services carried out directly or indirectly for the purpose of

provisioning a military establishment;

(ii1) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials from which they are

derived; or

(iv) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations;

(c) preventing a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations under the Charter of

the United Nations, done at San Francisco on 26 June 1945, for the purpose of maintaining

international peace and security.

ARTICLE 4.9

Application of Laws and Regulations

Article 2.8 (Transfers) shall not be construed as preventing a Party from applying in an equitable

and non-discriminatory manner, and in a way that would not constitute a disguised restriction on

investment, its laws and regulations relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency, bank recovery and resolution, the protection of the rights of creditors,

or the prudential supervision of financial institutions;

EU/VN/IPA/en 117

(b)

(d)

(e)

(f)

issuing of, trading or dealing in financial instruments;

financial reporting or record keeping of transfers where necessary to assist law enforcement or

financial regulatory authorities;

criminal or penal offences, deceptive or fraudulent practices;

ensuring the satisfaction of judgments in adjudicatory proceedings; or

social security, public retirement or compulsory savings schemes.

ARTICLE 4.10

Temporary Safeguard Measures

In exceptional circumstances of serious difficulties for the operation of the Union's economic and

monetary union, or, in the case of Viet Nam, for the operation of the monetary and exchange rate

policy, or a threat thereof, the Party concerned may take safeguard measures that are strictly

necessary with regard to transfers for a period not exceeding one year.

EU/VN/IPA/en 118

1.

ARTICLE 4.11

Restrictions in Case of Balance of Payments or External Financial Difficulties

Where a Party experiences serious balance of payments or external financial difficulties, or a

threat thereof, it may adopt or maintain safeguard measures with regard to transfers, which shall:

(a)

(b)

(d)

(e)

2.

be non-discriminatory compared to third countries in like situations;

not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance of payments or external financial

difficulties;

be consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund as

applicable;

avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and financial interests of the other

Party; and

be temporary and phased out progressively as the situation improves.

A Party having adopted or maintaining the measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall promptly

notify the other Party of them and present, as soon as possible, a time schedule for their removal.

EU/VN/IPA/en 119

3. Where restrictions are adopted or maintained under paragraph 1, consultations shall be held
promptly in the Committee unless consultations are held in other fora. The consultations shall
assess the balance of payments or external financial difficulty that led to the respective measures,

taking into account, inter alia, such factors as:

(a) the nature and extent of the difficulties;

(b) the external economic and trading environment; or

(c) alternative corrective measures which may be available.

The consultations shall address the compliance of any restrictive measures with paragraph 1. All
relevant findings of statistical or factual nature presented by the International Monetary Fund shall

be accepted and conclusions shall take into account the assessment by the International Monetary

Fund of the balance of payments and the external financial situation of the Party concerned.

EU/VN/IPA/en 120

ARTICLE 4.12

Disclosure of Information

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as requiring a Party to make available
confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be
contrary to the public interest, or which would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of
particular enterprises, public or private, except where a panel requires confidential information in
dispute settlement proceedings under Section A (Resolution of Disputes between Parties) of
Chapter 3 (Dispute Settlement). In such cases, the panel shall ensure that confidentiality is fully

protected.
2. When a Party submits to the Committee information which is considered as confidential under
its laws and regulations, the other Party shall treat that information as confidential, unless the
submitting Party agrees otherwise.

ARTICLE 4.13

Entry into Force

1. This Agreement shall be approved by the Parties in accordance with their respective

applicable legal procedures.

EU/VN/IPA/en 121

2. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the date
on which the Parties have notified each other of the completion of their applicable legal procedures

for the entry into force of this Agreement. The Parties may agree on another date.

3. Notifications shall be sent to the Secretary-General of the Council of the European Union and

to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam.

4. This Agreement may be provisionally applied if the Parties so agree. In this case the
Agreement shall apply from the first day of the month following the date on which the Union and
Viet Nam have notified each other of the completion of their applicable legal procedures for the

provisional application. The Parties may agree on another date.

5. In the event that certain provisions of this Agreement cannot be provisionally applied, the
Party which cannot undertake such provisional application shall notify the other Party of the
provisions which cannot be provisionally applied. Notwithstanding paragraph 4, provided the other
Party has completed the applicable legal procedures for the provisional application and does not
object to provisional application within 10 days of the notification that certain provisions cannot be
provisionally applied, the provisions of this Agreement which have not been notified shall be

provisionally applied from the first day of the month following the notification.

6. | A Party may terminate the provisional application by written notification to the other Party.

Such termination shall take effect on the first day of the second month following the notification.

EU/VN/IPA/en 122

7. Where this Agreement, or certain provisions thereof, is provisionally applied, the term "entry
into force of this Agreement" shall be understood to mean the date of provisional application. The
Committee and other bodies established under this Agreement may exercise their functions during
the provisional application of this Agreement. Any decisions adopted in the exercise of those
functions will only cease to be effective if the provisional application of this Agreement is

terminated and this Agreement does not enter into force.

ARTICLE 4.14

Duration

1. | This Agreement shall be valid indefinitely.

2. The Union or Viet Nam may notify in writing the other Party of its intention to terminate this

Agreement. The termination shall take effect at the end of the sixth month after the notification.

EU/VN/IPA/en 123

ARTICLE 4.15

Termination

In the event that this Agreement is terminated pursuant to Article 4.10 (Duration), the provisions of
Chapter 1 (Objectives and General Definitions), Articles 2.1 (Scope), 2.2 (Investment and
Regulatory Measures and Objectives) and 2.5 (Treatment of Investment) to 2.9 (Subrogation), the
relevant provisions of Chapter 4 and the provisions of Section B (Resolution of Disputes between
Investors and Parties) of Chapter 3 (Resolution of Disputes between Investors and Parties) shall
continue to be effective for a further period of 15 years from the date of termination, with respect to
investments made before the date of termination of the present Agreement, unless the Parties agree
otherwise. This Article does not apply if the provisional application of this Agreement is terminated

and this Agreement does not enter into force.

ARTICLE 4.16

Fulfilment of Obligations

1. | The Parties shall take any general or specific measures required to fulfil their obligations

under this Agreement. They shall ensure that the objectives set out in this Agreement are attained.

EU/VN/IPA/en 124

2. If either Party considers that the other Party has committed a material breach of the
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, it may take appropriate measures with respect to this

Agreement in accordance with Article 57 of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.

ARTICLE 4.17

Persons Exercising Delegated Government Authority

Unless otherwise specified in this Agreement, each Party shall ensure that any person, including a
state-owned enterprise, an enterprise granted special rights or privileges or a designated monopoly,
that has been delegated regulatory, administrative or other governmental authority by a Party at any
level of government as provided for in its domestic legislation, acts in accordance with the Party's
obligations as set out under this Agreement in the exercise of its authority.

ARTICLE 4.18

No Direct Effect
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as conferring rights or imposing obligations on

persons, other than those created between the Parties under public international law. Viet Nam may

provide otherwise under its domestic law.

EU/VN/IPA/en 125

ARTICLE 4.19

Annexes

The Annexes to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof.

ARTICLE 4.20

Relations to other Agreements

1. | Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, previous agreements between the Union or

its Member States and Viet Nam are not superseded or terminated by this Agreement.

2. This Agreement shall be part of the overall relations between the Union and its
Member States, of the one part, and Viet Nam, of the other part, as provided for in the Partnership

and Cooperation Agreement and it shall form part of the common institutional framework.
3. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as requiring a Party to act in a manner

inconsistent with their obligations under the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade

Organization, done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994.

EU/VN/IPA/en 126

4. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the agreements between Member States of the
Union and Viet Nam listed in Annex 6 (List of Investment Agreements) including the rights and
obligations derived therefrom, shall be terminated and cease to have effect, and shall be replaced

and superseded by this Agreement.

5. in the event of the provisional application pursuant to paragraph 4 of Article 4.13 (Entry into
Force) the application of the provisions of the agreements listed in Annex 6 (List of Investment
Agreements), as well as the rights and obligations derived therefrom, shall be suspended as of the
date of provisional application. In the event that the provisional application of this Agreement is
terminated and this Agreement does not enter into force, the suspension shall cease and the

agreements listed in Annex 6 (List of Investment Agreements) shall have effect.

6. Notwithstanding paragraphs 4 and 5, a claim may be submitted pursuant to an agreement
listed in Annex 6 (List of Investment Agreements), in accordance with the rules and procedures

established in that agreement, provided that:

(a) the claim arises from an alleged breach of that agreement that took place prior to the date of
suspension of the application of the agreement pursuant to paragraph 5 or, if the application of
the agreement is not suspended pursuant to paragraph 5, prior to the date of entry into force of

this Agreement; and

The Parties share the understanding that the "sunset clauses" included in the agreements listed
in Annex 6 (List of Investment Agreements ) shall also cease to have effect.

The Parties share the understanding that the "sunset clauses" included in the agreements listed
in Annex 6 (List of Investment Agreements ) shall also be suspended.

For greater certainty, this sentence shall not bring into effect those agreements that have not
yet entered into force or were terminated in accordance with their own provisions.

EU/VN/IPA/en 127

(b) no more than three years have elapsed from the date of suspension of the application of the
agreement pursuant to paragraph 5 or, if the application of the agreement is not suspended
pursuant to paragraph 5, from the date of entry into force of this Agreement until the date of

submission of the claim.

7. Notwithstanding paragraphs 4 and 5, if the provisional application of this Agreement is
terminated and this Agreement does not enter into force, a claim may be submitted pursuant to this
Agreement, in accordance with the rules and procedures established in this Agreement, provided

that:

(a) the claim arises from an alleged breach of this Agreement that took place during the period of

provisional application of this Agreement; and

(b) no more than three years have elapsed from the date of termination of the provisional

application until the date of submission of the claim.

8. For greater certainty, no claim may be submitted pursuant to this Agreement and in
accordance with the rules and procedures established therein if the claim arises from an alleged
breach of this Agreement that took place before the date of entry into force of this Agreement or,

where this Agreement is provisionally applied, before the date of provisional application.

9. For the purposes of this Article, the definition of "entry into force of this Agreement"
provided for in paragraph 7 of Article 4.13 (Entry into Force) does not apply.

EU/VN/IPA/en 128

ARTICLE 4.21

Future Accessions to the Union

1. The Union shall notify Viet Nam of any request for accession of a third country to the Union.

2. During the negotiations between the Union and the candidate country seeking accession, the

Union shall endeavour to:

(a) provide, upon request of Viet Nam, and to the extent possible, information regarding any

matter covered by this Agreement; and

(b) take into account concerns expressed by Viet Nam.

3. The Union shall notify Viet Nam of the entry into force of any accession to the Union.

4. |The Committee shall examine, sufficiently in advance of the date of accession of a third

country to the Union, any effects which that accession may have on this Agreement.

EU/VN/IPA/en 129

5. | Any new Member State of the Union shall accede to this Agreement from the date of its
accession to the Union by means of a clause to that effect in the act of accession to the Union. If the
act of accession to the Union does not provide for the automatic accession of the Member State of
the Union to this Agreement, the Member State of the Union concerned shall accede to this
Agreement by depositing an act of accession to this Agreement with the Secretary-General of the
Council of the Union and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam, or their respective
successors. The Parties may, by decision of the Committee, put in place any necessary adjustments

or transitional arrangements.

ARTICLE 4.22

Territorial Application

This Agreement shall apply:

(a) with respect to the EU Party, to the territories in which the Treaty on European Union and the

Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union are applied and under the conditions laid

down in those Treaties; and

(b) with respect to Viet Nam, to its territory.

References to "territory" in this Agreement shall be understood in this sense, except as otherwise

expressly provided for.

EU/VN/IPA/en 130

ARTICLE 4.23

Authentic Texts
This Agreement is drawn up in duplicate in the Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English,
Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish,

Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovenian, Spanish, Swedish and Vietnamese languages, each of

these texts being equally authentic.