STRENGTHEN the special bonds of friendship and cooperation between them;
CONTRIBUTE to the harmonious development and expansion of world trade;
REDUCE obstacles to their bilateral trade;

STRENGTHEN their economic relations and promote economic cooperation, in
particular for the development of trade and investments;

RECOGNISE that the promotion and protection of investments of investors of one Party
in the territory of the other Party are conducive to the stimulation of mutually beneficial
business activity;

CREATE an expanded and stable market for their goods and services and establish clear
and mutually advantageous rules in order to foster a favourable environment for their
trade and investments;

PROMOTE the harmonious development of their trade as well as the expansion and
diversification of their mutual cooperation in fields of common interest;

REAFFIRM their membership in the World Trade Organisation and their commitment
to comply with their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organisation and other agreements to which both Parties
are party; and

HAVE AGREED in pursuit of the above, to conclude the following Free Trade
Agreement (“this Agreement’) as follows:

CHAPTER 2
TRADE IN GOODS

Article 2.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

Agreement on Agriculture means the WTO Agreement on Agriculture contained in Annex
1 of the WTO Agreement;

agricultural goods means those goods referred to in Article 2 of the Agreement on
Agriculture;

agricultural export subsidies shall have the meaning assigned to that term in Article 1(e) of
the Agreement on Agriculture, including any amendment of that Article;

consular transactions means requirements that goods of a Party intended for export to the
territory of the other Party must first be submitted to the supervision of the Consul of the
importing Party in the territory of the exporting Party for the purpose of obtaining consular
invoices or consular visas for commercial invoices, certificates of origin, manifests, shippers’
export declarations, or any other customs documentation required on or in connection with
importation;

import licensing means an administrative procedure requiring the submission of an
application or other documentation (other than that generally required for customs clearance

purposes) to the relevant administrative body as a prior condition for importation into the
territory of the importing Party;

Article 2.2: Scope and Coverage

Except as otherwise provided, this Chapter applies to trade in goods between the Parties.

Article 2.3: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in accordance
with Article III of GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, and to this end, Article HI
of GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes, are incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the measures set out in Annex 2A (Exceptions to Articles
2.3 (National Treatment) and 2.5 (Import and Export Restrictions)).

Article 2.4: Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties

I. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may increase any
existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty or charges having equivalent effect, on
an originating good.

2. For greater certainty, a Party may:

(a) modify a tariff on a good for which no tariff preference is claimed under this
Agreement;

raise a customs duty to the level established in its Schedule following a
unilateral reduction for the respective year; or

maintain or increase a customs duty as authorised by the Dispute Settlement
Body established by Annex 2 of the WTO Agreement or as authorised by an
Agreement under the WTO Agreement.

3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall progressively reduce
or eliminate its customs duties on originating goods in accordance with its Schedule of tariff
commitments in Annex 2B (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties).

4. On the request of either Party, the Parties shall consult about considering accelerating
the reduction and/or elimination of customs duties set out in their Schedules in Annex 2B
(Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties). An agreement between the Parties to accelerate
the reduction and/or elimination of a customs duty on an originating good shall be carried out

in accordance with Chapter 13 (Administration) of this Agreement.

5. A Party may at any time unilaterally accelerate the reduction and/or elimination of
customs duties on originating goods of the other Party set out in its Schedule in Annex 2B
(Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties). A Party shall inform the other Party as early
as practicable before the new rate of customs duty takes effect.

Article 2.5: Import and Export Restrictions

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall adopt or maintain
any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any good of the other Party or on the
exportation or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of the other Party, except
in accordance with Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes; and to this end,
Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its Interpretative Notes are incorporated into and made a
part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. The Parties understand that the GATT 1994 rights and obligations incorporated by
paragraph 1 prohibit, in any circumstances in which any other form of restriction 1s prohibited,
a Party from adopting or maintaining:

(a) export and import price requirements, except as permitted in enforcement of
countervailing and anti-dumping duty orders and undertakings; or

(b)

import licensing conditioned on the fulfilment of a performance requirement.

3. Paragraph 1 and 2 shall not apply to the measures set out in Annex 2A (Exceptions to
Articles 2.3 (National Treatment) and 2.5 (Import and Export Restrictions)).

4. For the purposes of this Article, performance requirement means a requirement that:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(e)

a given level or percentage of goods or services be exported;

domestic goods or services of the Party granting a waiver of customs duties or
an import license be substituted for imported goods;

a person benefiting from a waiver of customs duties or an import license
purchase other goods or services in the territory of the Party granting the waiver
of customs duties or the import license, or accord a preference to domestically
produced goods;

a person benefiting from a waiver of customs duties or an import license
produce goods or supply services, in the territory of the Party granting the
waiver of customs duties or the import license, with a given level or percentage
of domestic content; or

relates in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of
exports or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows;

but does not include a requirement that an imported good be:

(f)
(g)

(h)

(i)

subsequently exported;

used as a material in the production of another good that is subsequently
exported;

substituted by an identical or similar good used as a material in the production
of another good that is subsequently exported; or

substituted by an identical or similar good that is subsequently exported.

5. In the event that a Party introduces a measure imposing a prohibition or restriction with
respect to the exportation of goods to the other Party, the Party imposing the measures, shall
ensure transparency of such measures and full compliance with the obligations under this
Agreement and the WTO Agreement with a view to minimising possible distortions to trade.
Upon request of a Party, the Parties shall enter into consultations regarding the measure
introduced under this paragraph.

Article 2.6: Trade Related Non-Tariff Measures

1. Further to Chapter 12 (Transparency), the Parties recognise the importance of ensuring
the transparency of non-tariff measures affecting trade between the Parties and recognise that
any such measures should not create an unnecessary obstacle to trade between the Parties.

2. To this end, the Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods established in Article 2.12 (Sub-
Committee on Trade in Goods) shall, when a Party identifies a specific non-tariff measure,
review the measure and consider approaches that may better facilitate trade between the
Parties and present to the Parties the results of its consideration, including any
recommendation. If necessary, the results of the consideration and recommendations of the
Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods shall be submitted at the next meeting of the Joint
Committee for consideration or action.

Article 2.7: Import Licensing

1. Each Party shall ensure that all automatic and non-automatic import licensing
measures are implemented in a transparent and predictable manner, and applied in accordance
with the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement.

2. Each Party shall notify the other Party of its existing import licensing procedures
within 30 days of the entry into force of this Agreement unless they were already notified or
provided under Article 5 or paragraph 3 of Article 7 of the Import Licensing Agreement. The
notification shall contain the same information as referred to in Article 5 or paragraph 3 of
Article 7 of the Import Licensing Agreement.

3. To the extent required by its law, before applying any new or modified import licensing
procedure, a Party shall publish the new procedure or modification on an official government
website at least 21 days before the new procedure or modification takes effect.

4. Upon request of the other Party, a Party shall respond within 60 days to an enquiry
regarding any import licensing procedure which it intends to adopt or has adopted or
maintained.

Article 2.8: Administrative Fees and Formalities
I. The Parties agree that fees, charges, formalities and requirements imposed in
connection with the importation and exportation of goods shall be consistent with their

obligations under GATT 1994.

2. No Party shall require consular transactions, including related fees and charges, in
connection with any good imported from the other Party.

3. No Party shall levy fees and charges on or in connection with importation or
exportation on an ad valorem basis.

4. Each Party shall make available through the internet a current list of the fees and
charges it imposes in connection with importation or exportation.

Article 2.9: Agricultural Export Subsidies

No Party shall adopt or maintain any export subsidy or other measures with equivalent

effects, as defined in the WTO Agreement on Agriculture, on trade in originating agricultural
goods, in accordance with this Agreement.

Article 2.10: Administration of Trade Regulations
In accordance with Article X of GATT 1994, each Party shall administer in a uniform,
impartial and reasonable manner, all its laws, regulations, judicial decisions and administrative
rulings pertaining to:
(a) the classification or the valuation of goods for customs purposes;
(b) rates of duty, taxes or other charges;
(c) requirements, restrictions or prohibitions on imports or exports;
the transfer of payments; and
issues affecting sale, distribution, transportation, insurance, warehousing,

inspection, exhibition, processing, mixing or other use of goods for customs
purposes.

Article 2.11: Contact Points and Consultations

l. Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communication among the
Parties on any matter relating to this Chapter.

2. Where a Party considers that any proposed measure or an amendment to an existing
measure of the other Party may affect trade in goods between the Parties, that Party may,
through the contact point, request detailed information relating to that measure and, if
necessary, request consultations with a view to resolving any concerns about the measure. The
other Party shall respond within a reasonable period of time to such requests for information
and consultations.

Article 2.12: Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods

1. The Parties hereby establish a Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods, comprising
representatives of each Party.

2. The Sub-Committee shall meet upon the request of either Party or the Joint Committee
to consider any matter arising under this Chapter and Chapter 5 (Trade Remedies).

3. The Sub-Committee shall meet at such venues and times as may be agreed by the
Parties. Meetings may be held by any means as mutually determined by the Parties.

4. The Sub-Committee’s functions shall include:

reviewing and monitoring the implementation and operation of the Chapters
referred to in paragraph 2;

identifying and recommending measures to resolve any difference that may
arise, and to promote and facilitate improved market access, including any
acceleration of tariff commitments under Article 2.4 (Reduction or Elimination
of Customs Duties);

recommending to the Joint Committee to establish any working groups, as it
deems necessary; and

undertaking any additional work that the Joint Committee may assign.

CHAPTER 3
RULES OF ORIGIN

Article 3.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

aquaculture means the farming of aquatic organisms, including fish, molluscs,
crustaceans, other aquatic invertebrates and aquatic plants, from seedstock such as eggs,
fry, fingerlings and larvae, by intervention in the rearing or growth processes to enhance
production such as regular stocking, feeding, or protection from predators, etc.;
Chapters, Headings and Subheadings means the chapters, the headings and the
subheadings (two, four and six-digit codes respectively) used in the nomenclature which

makes up the Harmonised System or HS;

CIF means the value of the goods imported, including freight and insurance costs to the
port of importation in Viet Nam or in Israel;

classification refers to the classification of a product or material under a particular
heading or sub-heading;

Competent Authorities refers to:

For Viet Nam, the Ministry of Industry and Trade or the General Department of
Viet Nam Customs under the Ministry of Finance, or its successor;

For Israel, the Customs Directorate of the Israel Tax Authority of the Ministry of
Finance, or its successor;

consignment means goods which are either sent simultaneously from one exporter to
one consignee or covered by a single transport document covering their shipment from
the exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such a document, by a single invoice;

customs value means the value as determined in accordance with Article VII of GATT
1994 and the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of GATT 1994 (WTO
Agreement on Customs Valuation);

ex-works price means the price paid for the product ex-works to the manufacturer in
Viet Nam or in Israel in whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out,
provided the price includes the value of all the materials used and all other costs related
to its production, excluding any internal taxes which are or may be repaid when the
product obtained is exported;

goods mean both materials and products;

FOB means the free-on-board value of the goods;

fungible materials means materials that are of the same kind and commercial quality,
with the same technical and physical characteristics, and which cannot be distinguished
from another, once they are incorporated into the finished good.

Issuing Authority refers to:

For Viet Nam, the Ministry of Industry and Trade or an Authority designated to
issue a certificate of origin as notified to the other Party in accordance with this
Chapter;

For Israel, The Customs Directorate of the Israel Tax Authority of the Ministry of
Finance;

material means any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in the
production of a good or physically incorporated into a good or subjected to a process in
the production of another good;

production means any kind of working or processing, including assembly or specific
operations such as growing, mining, harvesting, farming, raising, breeding, extracting,
gathering, collecting, capturing, fishing, trapping, hunting or manufacturing;

product means the product manufactured, even if it is intended for later use in another
manufacturing operation;

Value of Non-Originating Materials is the CIF value at the time of importation or the

earliest ascertained price paid for all non-originating materials that are acquired by the
producer in the production of the good.

Article 3.2: Originating Goods

For the purposes of implementing this Agreement, the following goods shall be
considered as originating in a Party:

(a) goods wholly obtained or produced in the Party within the meaning of
Article 3.4 (Wholly Obtained Goods);

(b) goods produced in a Party exclusively from originating materials from Viet
Nam or Israel, and meet all other applicable requirements of this Chapter; or

goods produced entirely in a Party incorporating materials which have not
been obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient
working or processing in a Party within the meaning of Article 3.5
(Sufficiently Worked or Processed Goods).

Article 3.3: Cumulation of Origin

1. Bilateral Cumulation

Notwithstanding Article 3.2 (Originating Goods), goods originating in one of the
Parties shall be considered as goods originating in the other Party and it shall not be
necessary that such goods had undergone working or processing.

2. The Parties may agree to review this Article within the framework of the Joint
Committee with a view to providing for other forms of cumulation for the purposes of
qualifying goods as originating goods under this Agreement.

Article 3.4: Wholly Obtained Goods

The following shall be considered as wholly produced or obtained in Viet Nam or in

Israel:

(a)

minerals extracted from the soil or subsoil of any of the Parties, including its
territorial seas, continental shelf or exclusive economic zone;

plants and vegetable goods grown, harvested, picked or gathered there;

live animals born and raised there;

goods obtained from aquaculture there;

goods from live animals as in subparagraph (c);

goods obtained by hunting, trapping, collecting, capturing and fishing there,

including fishing in its territorial sea continental shelf or in the exclusive
economic zone;

used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials
including used tyres fit only for retreading;

waste and scrap resulting from utilisation, consumption or manufacturing
operations conducted there;

goods of sea fishing, and other marine goods taken from the waters in the
high seas, only if done by any vessel registered or recorded with a Party and
entitled to fly the flag of that Party in accordance with its domestic law;

goods taken or extracted from the waters, seabed or subsoil outside the
territorial sea of a Party, provided that the Party has rights to exploit such
waters, seabed or subsoil;

goods produced on board any factory ship registered or recorded with a
Party and entitled to fly the flag of that Party, exclusively from the goods
referred to in subparagraphs (1) and (j); and

goods produced in any of the Parties exclusively, from the goods specified
in subparagraphs (a) to (k).

Article 3.5: Sufficiently Worked or Processed Goods

For the purposes of Article 3.2(c), goods which are not wholly obtained are
considered to be sufficiently worked or processed when the conditions set out in the list
in Annex 3A (Product Specific Rules of Origin) are fulfilled.!

Those conditions indicate, for all goods covered by this Agreement, the working
or processing which must be carried out on non-originating materials used in
manufacturing and apply only in relation to such materials. Accordingly, it follows that
if non-originating materials undergo sufficient working or processing, which results in
an originating good, and when that good is used in the subsequent manufacture of
another good, no account shall be taken of the non-originating material contained
therein.

Article 3.6: De Minimis

1. A good that does not undergo a change in tariff classification pursuant to Article
3.5.1 and Annex 3A (Product Specific Rules of Origin) shall be considered as
originating if:

(a) the value of all non-originating materials used in its production that do not
undergo the required change in tariff classification does not exceed 10
percent of the ex-works price of the good or for Chapters 15 through 24 of
the Harmonised System 10 percent of the weight of the good;

the good meets all other applicable criteria set forth in this Chapter for
qualifying as an originating good; and

any of the percentages given in Annex 3A (Product Specific Rules of
Origin) for the maximum value of non-originating materials are not
exceeded through the application of this paragraph.

2. A good provided for in Chapters 50 through 63 of the Harmonised System that
1s not an originating good, because certain fibres or yarns used in the production of the
component of the good that determines the tariff classification of the good do not
undergo an applicable change in tariff classification set out in Annex 3A (Product
Specific Rules of Origin), shall nonetheless be considered as originating if the total
weight of all such fibres or yarns in that component is not more than 10 percent of the
total weight of that component.

If a good is subject to Article 3.5.1, the installation of substantial software developed in a Party shall be
taken into account as a manufacturing process.

Article 3.7: Insufficient Working or Processing

1. The following operations shall be considered as insufficient working or
processing to confer the status of originating goods, whether or not the requirements of
Article 3.5 (Sufficiently Worked or Processed Goods) are satisfied:

(a)

(1)

(m)

(n)

(0)

preserving operations to ensure that the goods remain in good condition
during transport and storage;

simple” changing of packaging and breaking-up and assembly of packages;
washing, cleaning, removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;
simple’ painting and polishing operations;

husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and rice;
ironing or pressing of textiles;

operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps; partial or total milling of
crystal sugar;

peeling, stoning and shelling, of fruits, nuts and vegetables;
sharpening, simple‘ grinding or simple cutting;

sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading and matching (including the
making-up of sets of articles);

affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs
on goods or their packaging;

dilution in water or other substances, providing that the characteristics of the
goods remain unchanged;

simple? placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or
boards and all other simple packaging operations;

simple° assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or
disassembly of goods into parts;

simple’ mixing of goods, whether or not of different kinds;

2 "Simple" generally describes activities which need neither special skills nor machines, apparatus or
equipment especially produced or installed for carrying out the activity. Simple mixing does not include a
chemical reaction. A chemical reaction means a process (including a biochemical process) which results
in a molecule with a new structure by breaking intermolecular bonds and forming new intramolecular
bonds, or by altering the spatial arrangement of atoms in a molecule.

3 see footnote 1.

* see footnote 1.

> see footnote 1.

° see footnote 1.

(p) a combination of two or more of the above operations; and

(q) slaughter of animals.

Article 3.8: Unit of Qualification

1. The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Chapter
shall be the particular product which is considered to be the basic unit when
determining classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonised System.

It follows that:

(a) When a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified
under the terms of the Harmonised System in a single subheading, the whole
constitutes the unit of qualification; and

(b) When a consignment consists of a number of identical goods classified
under the same subheading of the Harmonised System, each product must be
taken individually when applying the provisions of this Chapter.

2. Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonised System, packaging is included
with the product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of
determining origin.

Article 3.9: Accounting Segregation

1. For the purpose of establishing if a product is originating when originating and
non-originating fungible materials that are mixed or physically combined, are utilised in
its manufacture, the origin of such materials can be determined by any of the inventory
management methods applicable in the Party.

2. Where considerable cost or material difficulties arise in keeping separate stocks
of originating and non-originating materials which are identical and interchangeable, the
Customs Authorities may authorise the so-called "accounting segregation" method to be
used for managing such stocks.

3. This method must be able to ensure that the number of goods obtained which
could be considered as "originating" is the same as that which would have been
obtained if there had been physical segregation of the stocks.

4. This method is recorded and applied on the basis of the general accounting
principles applicable in the Party where the product was manufactured.

5. The beneficiary of this facilitation may issue or apply for proofs of origin, as the
case may be, for the quantity of goods which may be considered as originating. At the
request of the Competent Authorities, the beneficiary shall provide a statement of how
the quantities have been managed.

7 see footnote 1.

Article 3.10: Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools

Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine,
apparatus or vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the price
thereof or which are not separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with the piece of
equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question.

Article 3.11: Sets

Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 of the Harmonised System, shall be regarded as
originating when all component goods are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is
composed of originating and non-originating goods, the set as a whole shall be regarded
as originating, provided that the CIF value of the non-originating goods does not exceed
15 percent of the ex-works price of the set.

Article 3.12: Neutral Elements

In order to determine whether a good originates, it shall not be necessary to determine
the origin of the following which might be used in its manufacture:

(a) energy and fuel;
(b) plant and equipment, including goods to be used for their maintenance;

(c) machines, tools, dyes and moulds; spare parts and materials used in the
maintenance of equipment and buildings; lubricants, greases, compounding
materials and other materials used in production or used to operate
equipment and buildings; gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety
equipment and supplies; catalysts and solvents; equipment, devices and
supplies used for testing or inspecting the product; and

(d) other goods which do not enter into the final composition of the product.

Article 3.13: Principle of Territoriality

1. Except as provided for in Article 3.3 (Cumulation of Origin) and paragraph 3 of
this Article, the conditions for acquiring originating status set out in Article 3.5
(Sufficiently Worked or Processed Goods), of this Chapter must be fulfilled without
interruption in Viet Nam or in Israel.

2. Where originating goods exported from Israel or from Viet Nam to a non-party,
are returned to the exporting Party, they must be considered as non-originating, unless it
can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Customs Authorities that:

(a) the returning goods are the same as those exported; and

(b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve
them in good condition while in that non-party or while being exported.

3. The Parties may agree to review this Article within the framework of the Joint
Committee.

Article 3.14: Direct Transport

1. The preferential treatment provided under this Agreement applies only to goods,
satisfying the requirements of this Chapter, which are transported directly between Viet
Nam and Israel.

2. However, goods constituting one single consignment may be transported
through other territories with, should the occasion arise, trans-shipment or temporary
warehousing in such territories, under the surveillance of the Customs Authorities
therein, provided that:

(a) they are not intended for trade, consumption, use or employment in the
non-party where the goods were in transit; and

(b) they do not undergo operations other than unloading, reloading, splitting
of a consignment or any operation designed to preserve them in good
condition.

3. Evidence that the conditions set out in paragraph | have been fulfilled shall be
supplied to the Customs Authorities of the importing Party by the production of:

(a) any single through transport documents, that meet international standards
and that proves that the goods were directly transported from the exporting
Party through the non-party where the goods are in transit to the importing
Party; or

(b) a certificate issued by the Customs Authorities of the non-party where
the goods were in transit which contains an exact description of the goods,
the date and place of loading and re-loading of the goods in that non-party
and the conditions under which the goods were placed; or

(c) in the absence of any of the above documents, any other documents that
will prove the direct shipment.

4. Goods exported from one of the Parties will retain their originating status when
re-imported into that Party.

Article 3.15: Exhibitions

1. Originating goods, sent for exhibition in a non-party other than Viet Nam or
Israel and sold after the exhibition for importation in Viet Nam or in Israel shall benefit
on importation from the provisions of this Agreement provided it is shown to the
satisfaction of the Customs Authorities that:

(a) an exporter has consigned these goods from Viet Nam or Israel to the
non-party in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there;

(b) the goods have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a
person in Viet Nam or in Israel;

(c) the goods have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately
thereafter in the non-party to which they were sent for exhibition; and

(d) the goods have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used
for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition.

2. A proof of origin must be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter and submitted to the Customs Authorities of the importing Party in the
normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon.

3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition,
fair or similar public show or display which is not organised for private purposes in
shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign goods, and during which
the goods remain under customs control.

Article 3.16: Proof of Origin

1. Goods originating in a Party shall, on importation into the other Party, benefit
from preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement upon submission of a Proof of
Origin in accordance with the domestic law of the importing Party, which shall be
completed in English.

2. Any of the following shall be considered a Proof of Origin:

(a) a certificate of origin in paper or electronic format issued by a Competent
Authority as per the specimen in Annex 3B (Certificate of Origin);

(b) an electronic certificate of origin issued by a Competent Authority in
accordance with Article 3.17 (Electronic Origin Data Exchange);

(c) a declaration subsequently referred to as the ‘Origin Declaration’, in the
cases specified in Article 3.22 (Conditions for Making out an Origin
Declaration), which describes the goods concerned in sufficient detail to
enable them to be identified.

3. For the purposes of this Chapter, “paper format” means a Certificate of Origin
manually or electronically signed, stamped, and issued in the exporting Party directly
from the Competent Authority's system and printed by the Competent Authority,
producer or exporter, or his authorised representative.

4. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating goods within the meaning of this
Chapter shall, in the cases specified in Article 3.26 (Exemptions from Proofs of Origin),

benefit from this Agreement without it being necessary to submit any of the documents
referred to above.

Article 3.17: Electronic Origin Data Exchange

1. For the purposes of Article 3.16.2(b), the Sub-Committee on Customs and Rules
of Origin shall endeavour to develop an electronic system for the exchange of
electronic certificates of origin and origin information to ensure the effective and
efficient implementation of this Chapter.

For the purposes of this Chapter, “an electronic certificate of origin” means a
Certificate of Origin that is transmitted electronically.

Article 3.18: Procedures for the Issuance of Certificates of Origin

1. Certificates of Origin shall be issued by the Competent Authority of the
exporting Party, having been made by the exporter or under the exporter's responsibility
by his authorised representative, in accordance with the domestic regulations of the
exporting Party.

2. The exporter applying for the issuance of a Certificate of Origin shall be
prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the Competent Authority of the
exporting Party, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the goods
concerned, as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter.

3. Certificates of Origin shall be issued if the goods to be exported can be
considered as goods originating in the exporting Party in accordance with Article 3.2
(Originating Goods).

4. The Competent Authority shall take any steps necessary to verify the originating
status of the goods and the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter. For this
purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any
inspection of the exporter's books or any other check considered appropriate.

5. Each Certificate of Origin will be assigned a specific number by the Competent
Authority.

6. Certificates of Origin shall be issued by the Competent Authority and made
available to the exporter as soon as the actual exportation has been affected or ensured,
or within three working days after the said date subject to each Party’s domestic law.

Article 3.19: Certificates of Origin Issued Retrospectively

1. Notwithstanding Article 3.18(6), a Certificate of Origin may exceptionally be
issued after the exportation of the goods to which it relates if it was not issued at the
time of exportation or within three working days as mentioned in Article 3.18(6),
because of errors or involuntary omissions or special circumstances or it is

demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Competent Authority that the Certificate was
issued but was not accepted at importation for technical reasons.

2. For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter must indicate in his
application the place and date of exportation of the goods to which the Certificate of
Origin relates, and state the reasons for his request.

3. The Competent Authority may issue a Certificate of Origin retrospectively only
after verifying that the information supplied in the exporter's application conforms with
that in the corresponding file.

4. It shall be indicated on the Certificates of Origin issued in accordance with this
Article that they were issued retrospectively in the appropriate field as detailed in
Annex 3B (Certificate of Origin). The Certificates of Origin issued retrospectively,
which shall bear the date of issue retrospectively, shall take effect from that date.

5. The provisions of this Article may be applied to goods which comply with the
provisions of this Agreement, including this Chapter, and which on the date of entry
into force of this Chapter are either in transit or are in Viet Nam or in Israel in
temporary storage under customs control, subject to the submission to the Customs
Authorities of the importing Party, within six months of the said date, of a Certificate of
Origin issued retrospectively by the Competent Authority of the exporting Party
together with the documents showing that the goods have been transported directly in
accordance with the provisions of Article 3.14 (Direct Transport).

Article 3.20: Duplicate Certificates of Origin

1. In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a Certificate of Origin in paper
format, the exporter may apply to the Competent Authority that issued it for a duplicate
made out on the basis of the export documents in their possession.

2. It shall be indicated in the appropriate field on the Certificates of Origin issued
in accordance with this Article that they are duplicates, as detailed in Annex 3B
(Certificate of Origin).

3. The duplicate, which shall bear the date of issue of the original Certificate of
Origin, shall take effect from that date.

Article 3.21: Approved Exporter

1. The Competent Authorities of the exporting Party may authorise any exporter,
(hereinafter “approved exporter”), who exports goods under this Agreement, to make
out Origin Declarations, a specimen of which appears in Annex 3C (Approved Exporter
Declaration Pursuant to Article 3.21), irrespective of the value of the goods concerned,
in accordance with appropriate conditions in the respective law of the exporting Party.
An exporter seeking a such authorisation must offer to the satisfaction of the Competent
Authorities all guarantees necessary to verify the originating status of the goods as well
as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter.

2. The Competent Authorities may grant the status of an approved exporter, subject
to any conditions which they consider appropriate as specified in each Party’s domestic
law.

3. The Competent Authorities shall grant to the approved exporter an authorisation
number which shall appear on the Origin Declaration. The text of the Origin
Declaration appears in Annex 3C (Approved Exporter Declaration Pursuant to Article
3.21).

4. The Competent Authorities shall monitor the use of the authorisation by the
approved exporter.

5. The Competent Authorities may withdraw the authorisation at any time. They
shall do so where the approved exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in
paragraph 1, no longer fulfils the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or otherwise
makes incorrect use of the authorisation.

Article 3.22: Conditions for Making out an Origin Declaration

1. An Origin Declaration as referred to in Article 3.16(2)(c) may be made out by an
approved exporter within the meaning of Article 3.21 (Approved Exporter) or by any
exporter where the value of the originating good does not exceed 1000 dollars. The text
of the Origin Declaration appears in Annex 3D (Origin Declaration Pursuant to Article
3.21).

2. The exporter making out an Origin Declaration shall be prepared to submit at
any time, upon request of the Competent Authority of the exporting Party, all
appropriate documents proving the originating status of the goods concerned, as well as
the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter.

3. An Origin Declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or
printing on the invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document, the
declaration, the text of which appears in Annex 3C (Approved Exporter Declaration
Pursuant to Article 3.21) and Annex 3D (Origin Declaration Pursuant to Article 3.21). If
the declaration 1s hand-written, it shall be written in ink in block letters.

Article 3.23: Validity of Proofs of Origin

1. Proofs of origin shall be valid for twelve months from the date of issue in the
exporting Party and must be submitted within that period to the Customs Authorities of
the importing Party.

2. Proofs of origin which are submitted to the Customs Authorities of the
importing Party after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be
accepted for the purposes of applying preferential treatment, where the failure to submit
these documents by the final date set is due to exceptional circumstances.

3. In other cases of belated presentation, the Customs Authorities of the importing
Party may accept the proofs of origin where the goods have been imported before the
said final date.

Article 3.24: Submission of Proofs of Origin

Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the Customs Authorities of the importing Party in
accordance with its domestic law, including the procedures applicable to that Party.

Article 3.25: Importation by Instalments

Where, upon request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the Customs
Authorities of the importing Party, dismantled or non-assembled goods within the
meaning of General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonised System are imported by instalments, a
single proof of origin for such goods shall be submitted to the Customs Authorities
upon the importation of the first instalment.

Article 3.26: Exemptions from Proofs of Origin

1. Goods sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or forming
part of travellers' personal luggage shall be admitted as originating goods without
requiring the submission of a proof of origin, provided that such goods are not imported
by way of trade and have been declared as meeting the requirements of this Chapter and
where there is no doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In the case of goods sent
by post, this declaration can be made on the customs declaration or on a sheet of paper
annexed to that document.

2. Imports which are occasional and consist solely of goods for the personal use of
the recipients or travellers or their families shall not be considered as imports by way of
trade if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the goods that no commercial
purpose is in view.

3. Furthermore, the total value of these goods shall not exceed US $300 in the case
of small packages or US $1000 in the case of goods forming part of travellers' personal

luggage.

Article 3.27: Supporting Documents

The documents referred to in Articles 3.16(3) and 3.19(2) and that are used for the
purposes of proving that goods covered by a Certificate of Origin or an Origin
Declaration can be considered as goods originating in Viet Nam or in Israel and fulfil
the other requirements of this Chapter may consist inter alia of the following:

(a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to
obtain the goods concerned, contained, for example in his accounts or
internal bookkeeping;

documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made
out in Viet Nam or in Israel where these documents are used in accordance
with domestic law;

documents proving the working or processing of materials in Viet Nam or in
Israel, issued or made out in Viet Nam or in Israel, where these documents
are used in accordance with domestic law;

Certificates of Origin or Origin Declarations proving the originating status
of materials used, issued or made out in Viet Nam or in Israel in accordance
with this Chapter;

appropriate evidence concerning working or processing undergone outside
Viet Nam or Israel by application of Article 3.13 (Principle of Territoriality)
of this Chapter, proving that the requirements of that Article have been
satisfied.

Article 3.28: Preservation of Proofs of Origin and Supporting Documents

1. The exporter applying for the issue of the Certificate of Origin shall keep the
documents referred to in Article 3.18 (Procedures for the Issuance of Certificates of
Origin) for at least five years.

2. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall keep a copy of this invoice
declaration, as well as the documents referred to in Article 3.22 (Conditions for Making
out an Origin Declaration) for at least five years.

3. The Competent Authority in the exporting Party that issued a Certificate of
Origin shall keep any document relating to the application procedure referred to in
Article 3.18 (Procedures for the Issuance of Certificates of Origin) for at least five
years.

4. The Customs Authorities of the importing Party shall keep the Certificates of
Origin and the invoice declarations submitted to them for at least five years.

Article 3.29: Discrepancies and Formal Errors

1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in a proof of
origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose
of carrying out the formalities for importing the goods shall not ipso facto render a
proof of origin null and void if it is duly established that the document does correspond
to the goods submitted.

2. Obvious formal errors on a proof of origin should not cause it to be rejected if
these errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements
made in it.

Article 3.30: Mutual Assistance

1. The Competent Authorities of Viet Nam and Israel shall provide each other with
the addresses of the Competent Authorities responsible for verifying Certificates and
origin declarations.

2. In order to ensure the proper application of this Chapter, Viet Nam and Israel
shall assist each other, through their respective Competent Authorities, in checking the
authenticity of the Certificates of Origin, the invoice declarations and the correctness of
the information given in these documents.

Article 3.31: Verification of Proofs of Origin

1. Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or
whenever the Customs Authorities of the importing Party have reasonable doubts as to
the authenticity of proofs of origin, the originating status of the goods concerned or the
fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter.

2. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the Customs
Authorities of the importing Party shall transmit requests for verification of origin
through electronic means to the Competent Authorities of the exporting Party. The
request for verification by post or by email shall include the number of the Certificate or
in the case of an Invoice Declaration, a copy thereof. In support of the request for
verification, where needed, the reasons for the request should be indicated, and any
documents and information obtained suggesting that the information given on the proofs
of origin is incorrect should be attached.

3. The verification shall be carried out by the Competent Authorities of the
exporting Party. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and
to carry out any inspection of the exporter's books or any other check considered
appropriate.

4. If the Customs Authorities of the importing Party decide to suspend the granting
of preferential treatment to the goods concerned while awaiting the results of the
verification, release of the goods shall be offered to the importer subject to any
precautionary measures judged necessary.

5. The Customs Authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the
results of this verification by post or email means as soon as possible. These results
must indicate clearly whether the information contained in the proofs of origin and the
supporting documents is correct, and whether the goods concerned can be considered as
goods originating in Viet Nam or Israel and fulfil the other requirements of this Chapter.

6. If there is no reply within 10 months of the date of the verification request or if
the reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the
proofs of origin or the real origin of the goods, the requesting Customs Authorities
shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.

7. This Article shall not preclude the exchange of information or the granting of
any other assistance as provided for in customs cooperation agreements.

Article 3.32: Denial of Preferential Treatment

1. Only for the following specific reasons, the preferential treatment may be
refused without verification of the Proofs of Origin:

(a) the requirements on direct transport of Article 3.14 (Direct Transport)
have not been fulfilled;

(b) the importer fails to submit the Proof of Origin to the Customs Authority
of the importing Party within the period specified in the importing Party’s law;

(c) the issuing authority of the exporting Party or the exporter did not sign
the Certificate of Origin electronically or manually.

2. If the Customs Authority of the importing Party denies a claim for preferential
tariff treatment, it shall provide the decision in writing to the importer that includes the
reasons for the decision.

Article 3.33: Dispute Settlement

1. Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Article 3.31
(Verification of Proofs of Origin) which cannot be settled between the Customs
Authorities requesting verification and the Competent Authorities responsible for
carrying out the verification or where a question is raised by one of those Customs
Authorities as to the interpretation of this Chapter, the matter shall be submitted to the
Sub-committee on Customs and Rules of Origin established by the Joint Committee in
accordance with Chapter 13 (Administration of the Agreement) of this Agreement. If
no solution is reached, Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of this Agreement shall apply.

2. In all cases, the settlement of disputes between the importer and the Customs
Authorities of the importing Party shall be under the legislation of said Party.

Article 3.34: Amendments to the Chapter

1. The Joint Committee may decide to amend the provisions of this Chapter.

2. The Joint Committee may modify specific rules of origin in the framework of
Annex 3A (Product Specific Rules of Origin) of this Chapter by mutual agreement.

Article 3.35: Sub-Committee on Customs and Rules of Origin

1. The Sub-Committee on Customs and Rules of Origin established by the Joint
Committee in accordance with Chapter 13 (Administration of the Agreement) of this

Agreement may review the provisions of this Chapter and submit a proposal for a
decision to be adopted by the Joint Committee to amend it.

2. The Sub-Committee on Customs and Rules of Origin shall endeavour to agree
upon the uniform administration of the rules of origin and valuation matters relating to
the rules of origin and technical, interpretative or administrative matters relating to this
Chapter.

CHAPTER 4
CUSTOMS ADMINISTRATION AND TRADE FACILITATION
Article 4.1: Customs Cooperation

1. The Parties shall cooperate in order to ensure the correct implementation and operation
of the provisions of this Agreement as they relate to:

(a) importations or exportations within the framework of this Agreement;
preferential treatment and claims procedures;
verification procedures;
customs valuation and tariff classification of goods; and
(e) restrictions or prohibitions on imports or exports.
2. Each Party shall designate official Contact Points and provide details thereof to the other
Party, with a view to facilitating the effective implementation of this Chapter and Chapter 3
(Rules of Origin). If a matter cannot be resolved through the Contact Points, it shall be referred
to the Subcommittee on Customs and Rules of Origin as set out in this Chapter.
3. The Parties, through their respective Customs Authorities, shall provide each other with
mutual assistance in customs matters in accordance with the provisions of Annex 4A (Mutual
Assistance in Customs Matters) in order to ensure the implementation of this Chapter.

Article 4.2: Customs Procedures

1. The Parties shall ensure that their customs procedures are applied in a manner that is
predictable, consistent, fair and transparent.

2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, the Parties shall:

(a) simplify their customs procedures to the greatest extent possible;

(b) make use of information and communications technology in their customs
procedures; and

the Parties recognise that electronic filing in trade and in the transfer of trade-related
information and electronic versions of documents 1s an alternative to paper-based methods that
will significantly enhance the efficiency of trade through the reduction of cost and time.
Therefore, the Parties shall cooperate with a view to implementing and promoting paperless
customs procedures.

Article 4.3: Release of Goods

1. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that its Customs Authority adopt or maintain
procedures that:

(a) provide for the release of goods within a period no greater than that required to
ensure compliance with its customs law;

provide for advance electronic submission and processing of information before
the physical arrival of goods to enable their release upon arrival; and

allow goods to be released at the point of arrival, without temporary transfer to
warehouses or other facilities.
Article 4.4: Risk Management

1. In administering customs procedures and to the extent possible, each Customs Authority
shall focus resources on high-risk shipments of goods.

2. The above shall not preclude a Party from conducting control which may require more
extensive examinations.

Article 4.5: Transparency

The Parties shall promptly publish or otherwise make publicly available, including on the
Internet, their laws, regulations, administrative procedures, and administrative rulings of
general application on customs matters that pertain to or affect the operation of this Agreement,
so as to enable interested persons and parties to become acquainted with them.

Article 4.6: Advance Rulings

1. In accordance with its domestic law, each Party shall endeavour to provide, through its
Customs Authority or other Competent Authority, for the expeditious issuance of written
advance rulings as follows:

(a) the Customs Authority in the importing Party shall endeavour to issue advance rulings
concerning the classification of goods and the appropriate method or criteria, and the
application thereof to be used for determining the customs value under a particular set
of facts; and

(b) the Customs Authorities in the exporting Party shall endeavour to issue advance rulings
concerning compliance with the rules of origin as set forth in Chapter 3 (Rules of
Origin).

2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for the issuance of such advance rulings,
including the details of the information required for processing an application for a ruling.

3. A Party may decline to issue an advance ruling if the facts and circumstances forming
the basis of the advance ruling are the subject of an investigation or an administrative or judicial
review. The Party that declines to issue an advance ruling shall promptly notify the requester
in writing, setting forth the relevant facts and the basis for its decision to decline to issue the
advance ruling.

4. Each Party shall provide that advance rulings shall be in force from the date of issuance,
or another date specified in the ruling. Subject to paragraph 1 to paragraph 3, an advance ruling
shall remain in force provided that the facts or circumstances on which the ruling is based
remain unchanged, or for the period specified in the laws, regulations or administrative rulings
of the Party that provided the ruling.

Article 4.7: Review and Appeal

Regarding its determinations on customs matters, each Party shall grant access to:

(a) at least one level of administrative review, within the same institution, of the
official or authority responsible for the determination under review; and

(b) judicial review of the determination or decision taken at the final level of
administrative review.

Article 4.8: Confidentiality

1. A Party shall maintain confidentiality of the information provided by the other Party
pursuant to Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin) and this Chapter, and protect such information from
disclosure that could prejudice the competitive position of the person providing the information.
Any violation of confidentiality shall be treated in accordance with the domestic legislation of
each Party.

2. The information mentioned in paragraph 1 shall not be disclosed without the specific
permission of the Party providing such information, except to the extent that it may be required
to be disclosed for law enforcement purposes or in the course of judicial proceedings in
accordance with the relevant applicable domestic law of the Party who received the
information.

Article 4.9: Subcommittee on Customs and Rules of Origin

1. The Parties agree to establish a Subcommittee on Customs and Rules of Origin to
address any customs-related issues relevant to:

(a) the uniform interpretation, application and administration of Chapter 3 (Rules of
Origin), and this Chapter;

addressing issues on tariff classification valuation and determination of the
origin of goods for the purposes of this Agreement;

reviewing rules of origin;

including in their bilateral dialogue regular updates on changes in their
respective law; and

(e) considering any other customs-related issues, referred to it by the Customs
Authorities of the Parties, by the Parties or by the Joint Committee.

2. The Subcommittee on Customs and Rules of Origin will meet within one year from the
date of entry into force of this Agreement and shall meet thereafter as agreed upon by the Parties
alternately in Israel or in Viet Nam.

3. The Subcommittee on Customs and Rules of Origin shall comprise representatives of
customs and, if necessary, other Competent Authorities from each Party and shall draw up its
own rules of procedure at its first meeting.

4. The Subcommittee on Customs and Rules of Origin may formulate resolutions,
recommendations or opinions which it considers necessary and report to the Parties or to the
Joint Committee.

5. The Subcommittee on Customs and Rules of Origin may draft uniform procedures,
which it considers necessary, to be submitted to the Joint Committee for its approval.

CHAPTER 5
TRADE REMEDIES

Section A: Bilateral Safeguard Measures

Article 5.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
competent investigating authority means:
(1) for Viet Nam, Trade Remedies Authority, in the Ministry of Industry and Trade;
(ii) — for Israel, the Commissioner of Trade Levies, in the Ministry of Economy and
Industry or the corresponding unit in the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development;
or their successors;
domestic industry means the producers as a whole of the like or directly competitive goods of
a Party or whose collective output of the like or directly competitive goods constitutes a major

proportion of the total production of such goods;

originating goods as defined in Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin);

serious injury means the significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic industry;

threat of serious injury means serious injury that is clearly imminent, based on facts and not
merely on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility.

transition period means, in relation to particular goods, the three year period beginning on the
date of entry into force of this Agreement, except where the tariff elimination or reduction for
the good occurs over a longer period of time, in which case the transition period shall be the
period of the staged tariff elimination for that good.

Article 5.2: Application of a Bilateral Safeguard Measure

1. Subject to Article 5.8 (Imposition of Global Safeguard Measures) of this Chapter, a Party
may apply a bilateral safeguard measure:

(a) only during the transition period; and

(b) if as a result of the reduction or elimination of a duty pursuant to this Agreement,
an originating good is being imported into the Party’s territory in such increased
quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic production, and under such
conditions that the imports of the originating good from that Party alone
constitute a substantial cause of serious injury, or threat thereof, to a domestic

5-1

industry.

2. If the conditions set out in paragraph 1 are met, a Party may to the minimum extent
necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury, or threat thereof:

(a) suspend the further reduction of any rate of a customs duty provided for under
this Agreement on the goods; or

(b) increase the rate of duty on the good to a level not to exceed the lesser of :

(1) the most-favoured-nation (MFN) applied rate of duty in effect at the time
the measure is applied, or

(11) the base rate as specified in the schedule to Annex 2B (Reduction or
Elimination of Customs Duties)

3. A Party that applies a bilateral safeguard measure under subparagraph 2(b) of this
Article may consider to minimise the negative impacts of the measure on bilateral trade by
establishing a tariff quota for the product concerned under the agreed preference established in
this Agreement.

(a) The tariff quota shall not be less than the average imports of the product
concerned in the 36 months prior to the period used for determining the existence

of serious injury.

The amount of goods included in the tariff quota may be imported under the rate
provided in the Annex 2B (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties).

The amount of goods beyond the tariff quota may be imported under the rate of
duty established in subparagraph 2 (b) of this Article.

Article 5.3: Limitations for Applying a Bilateral Safeguard Measure

1. Bilateral safeguard measures shall not be applied in the first year of the transition period.

2. A bilateral safeguard measure shall not be applied except to the minimum extent and for
such time as may be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment
and, it shall not be applied for a period exceeding two years.

However, this period may be extended for up to one additional year if the competent
authorities of the importing Party determine, in conformity with the procedures specified in
Article 5.4 (Investigation Procedures), that the measure continues to be necessary to prevent or
remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment and that there is evidence that the industry is
adjusting, provided that the total period of application of a safeguard measure, including the
period of initial application and any extension thereof, shall not exceed three years. The Party
maintaining the measure beyond a one year period shall progressively liberalise it at annual
intervals during the period of application.

3. Neither Party shall apply a bilateral safeguard measure more than once against the same

5-2

good.

4. Upon termination of the bilateral safeguard measure, the rate of duty shall be the level
which would have been in effect had the measure not been imposed. If a tariff quota was applied
as a bilateral safeguard measure, it will be eliminated upon termination of the bilateral safeguard
measure.

5. Bilateral safeguard measures shall not be applied or maintained after the transition
period. Upon request of a Party, the Joint Committee shall evaluate whether to continue for
certain goods the bilateral safeguard measure mechanism included in this Chapter. For greater
certainty, such request by a Party to the Joint Committee should be made prior to the termination
of the transition period.

6. No Party shall apply or maintain a bilateral safeguard measure under this section for any
product imported under a tariff rate quota (TRQ) established by the Parties under this
Agreement.

Article 5.4: Investigation Procedures

1. A Party shall apply a bilateral safeguard measure only following an investigation, by
the Party’s competent authority in accordance with its internal legislation and Articles 3 and
4.2(c) of the WTO Agreement on Safeguards (hereinafter "the Safeguards Agreement"); and to
this end, Articles 3 and 4.2(c) of the Safeguards Agreement are incorporated into and made part
of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. In the investigation described in paragraph 1, a Party shall comply with the requirements
of Articles 4.2 (a) and 4.2 (b), of the Safeguards Agreement; and to this end, Articles 4.2(a) and
4.2 (b) of the Safeguards Agreement are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement,
mutatis mutandis.

Article 5.5 Provisional Bilateral Safeguard Measures

1. In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage that would be difficult to
repair, a Party may apply a bilateral safeguard measure on a provisional basis pursuant to a
preliminary determination by its competent authorities that there is clear evidence that imports
of an originating good from the other Party have increased as the result of the reduction or
elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement, and such imports constitute a substantial
cause of serious injury, or threat thereof, to the domestic industry.

2. The Party intending to take provisional bilateral safeguard measures shall immediately
notify the other Party and provide a notification containing all pertinent information, which
shall include preliminary evidence of serious injury or threat thereof caused by increased
imports, a precise description of the product involved and the proposed measure, as well as the
proposed date of introduction and its expected duration. A Party shall not apply a provisional
bilateral safeguard measure until at least 45 days after the date its competent authorities initiate
an investigation. The duration of any provisional bilateral safeguard measure shall not exceed
200 days, during which time the Party shall comply with the requirements of Article 5.4
(Investigation Procedures).

Article 5.6: Notification and Consultations
1. A Party shall promptly notify the other Party, in writing upon:
(a) initiating a bilateral safeguard proceeding under this Chapter;

(b) making a finding of serious injury, or threat thereof, caused by increased
imports under Article 5.2 (Application of a Bilateral Safeguard Measure); and

(c) taking a decision to apply or extend provisional or final bilateral safeguard
measures.

2. A Party shall provide to the other Party a copy of the public version of the
investigation reports under Article 5.4.1 of its competent investigating authority.

3. If a Party whose good is subject to a bilateral safeguard proceeding under this Chapter
requests within 10 days from receipt of a notification as specified in paragraph 1(b) to hold
consultations, the Party conducting that proceeding shall enter into consultations with the
requesting Party with a view to finding an appropriate and mutually acceptable solution. If the
Parties fail to find a mutually acceptable solution within 30 days of the notification being
made, the Party may apply the measures.

Article 5.7: Compensation

1. No later than 30 days after it applies a safeguard measure, a Party shall afford an
opportunity for the other Party to consult with it regarding appropriate trade liberalising
compensation in the form of concessions having substantially equivalent trade effects or
equivalent to the value of the additional duties expected to result from the measure. The
applying Party shall provide such compensation as the Parties mutually agree.

2. If the Parties are unable to agree on compensation through consultation under paragraph
1 within 30 days after consultations begin, the Party against whose originating good the measure
is applied may suspend the application of concessions with respect to originating goods of the
applying Party that have trade effects substantially equivalent to the safeguard measure.

3. A Party shall notify the other Party in writing at least 30 days before suspending
concessions under paragraph 2.

4. The obligation to provide compensation under paragraph | and right to suspend
concessions under paragraph 2 shall terminate on the date of the termination of the safeguard
measure.

5. Any compensation shall be based upon the total period of application of the provisional
safeguard measure and of the safeguard measure.

Section B: Global Safeguard Measures

Article 5.8: Imposition of Global Safeguard Measures

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and
the Safeguards Agreement.

2. A Party may not apply, with respect to the same good, at the same time:

(a) a bilateral safeguard measure; and

(b) a measure under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement.
3. For imports of goods originating from the territory of a Party to the territory of the
other Party that are not a cause of serious injury or threat thereof to the domestic industry

producing like or directly competing goods of the importing Party, the safeguard measures
with respect to imports of such goods do not apply.

4. When determining whether the imports from the other Party is a cause of serious
injury or threat thereof, the competent investigating authority of the importing Party may
consider such factors as the import shares and the amount of imports of the other Party, and
the changes thereof, among others.

5. The following conditions and limitations shall apply to a proceeding that may result

in global safeguard measures under this Article:

(a) the Party initiating such a proceeding shall, without delay, deliver to the other
Party written notice thereof, including all pertinent information leading to the
initiation of the global safeguard investigation and offer the possibility for
consultations to the other Party;

where, as a result of a measure, the rate of a customs duty is increased, the
margin of preference under this Agreement shall be maintained;

upon the termination of the measure, the rate of a customs duty shall be the
preferential rate which would have been in effect had the measure not been
imposed. If a tariff quota was applied as a global safeguard measure, it will be
eliminated upon termination of the global safeguard measure.

Section C: Anti-dumping and Countervailing Measures
Article 5.9: Anti-dumping and Countervailing Measures

1. Both Parties agree that anti-dumping and countervailing measures should be used in full
compliance with Article VI of GATT 1994, WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VI
of GATT 1994 and WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.

2. The Parties shall ensure full and meaningful disclosure of all essential facts and
considerations which form the basis for the decision to apply anti- dumping and countervailing
measures. Disclosures shall be made in writing and allow interested parties sufficient time to
respond with comments. After final disclosure interested parties shall be given at least seven
days to make these comments.

3. The competent investigating authority shall, upon receiving a properly documented
application by or on behalf of its domestic industry for the initiation of the investigation in
respect of a good from the other Party, and before proceeding to initiate such an anti-dumping
investigation, notify the other Party at least 10 working days in advance of the date of initiation
of such investigation.

4. If, in an anti-dumping or countervailing duty investigation that involves imports from
the other Party, the investigating authority determines that a timely response to a request for

information does not comply with its request:

(a) the investigating authority shall inform the interested party that submitted the

response of the nature of the deficiency and, to the extent practicable in light of
time limits established to complete the anti-dumping or countervailing duty
action, provide that interested party with an opportunity to remedy or explain
the deficiency.

if that interested Party submits further information in response to that deficiency

and the investigating authority finds that the response is not satisfactory, or that
the response is not submitted within the applicable time limits, and if the
investigating authority disregards all or part of the original and subsequent
responses, the investigating authority shall explain in the determination or other
written document the reason for disregarding the information.

5. All interested parties shall be granted the right to be heard in order to express their
views during anti-dumping and anti-subsidy investigations.

6. In an anti-dumping or countervailing duty investigation, prior to the imposition of a
provisional measure and prior to the definitive determination, the exporting Party may request
consultations with a view of seeking a solution acceptable to the Parties. The importing Party
shall enter into consultations with the requesting Party. Such consultations shall not delay or
impede the investigation and its subsequent proceedings by the Party in accordance with the
relevant WTO Agreements.

7. An anti-dumping or countervailing duty imposed by a Party shall not exceed the
margin of dumping or countervailable subsidy, and the Party shall endeavour to ensure that

the amount of this duty is less than that margin if such lesser duty would be adequate to
remove the injury to the domestic industry.

8. Anti-dumping or countervailing measures may not be applied by a Party where, on
the basis of the information made available during the investigation, it can clearly be
concluded that it is not in the public interest to apply such measures. In determining the public
interest, the Party shall take into account, inter alia, the interests of the domestic industry,
importers, representative users and representative consumers based on the relevant
information provided to the investigating authorities.

9. The Party whose good is subject to an anti-dumping or countervailing measure
imposed by the other Party has the right to request consultations. Upon request, the other
Party shall enter into consultation with the requesting Party.

Section D: General Provision

Article 5.10: Selection of Measures

In each section, the Parties, in selecting measures relating to that section, shall give priority
to those measures which cause less economic impact on bilateral trade.

CHAPTER 6
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

Article 6.1: Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

Competent Authorities mean those recognised by each Party as
responsible for developing, implementing and administering the SPS
measures within its territory as listed in Annex 6A.

SPS Agreement means the WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary
and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement).

2. The Parties may agree on other definitions for the application of this Chapter, taking

into consideration the glossaries and definitions used by the relevant international
organisations, such as the CODEX Alimentarius Commission (CODEX), World
Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH), and the International Plant Protection
Convention (IPPC).

The definitions contained in Annex A of the SPS Agreement shall apply.

Article 6.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a)

enhance practical implementation of the principles and disciplines
contained within the SPS Agreement and applicable international standards,
guidelines and recommendations developed by relevant international
organisations;

facilitate trade between the Parties and ensure that SPS measures imposed
by each Party do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade while protecting
human, animal or plant life or health in the territory of each Party; and

provide a means to strengthen communication, cooperation and resolution
on SPS issues that affect trade between the Parties and other agreed matters
of interest to the Parties, taking into account the different levels of
development between the Parties.

Article 6.3: Scope

This Chapter shall apply to the preparation, adoption and application of all SPS measures
of a Party which may directly or indirectly affect the bilateral trade of the Parties.

Article 6.4: General Provisions

The Parties reaffirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other under
the SPS Agreement and incorporate it into this Agreement.

Article 6.5: SPS Contact Points

1. For the purpose of facilitating communication on SPS trade-related matters, the
Parties agree to establish Contact Points as follows:

(a) For Viet Nam, Viet Nam SPS Office, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development, or its successor; and

(b) For Israel, the Ministry of Economy and Industry, Foreign Trade
Administration, or its successor.

2. For the purpose of implementing the provisions of this Agreement, the Parties agree
to share information related to Competent Authorities of each Party with responsibility for
sanitary and phytosanitary measures, listed in Annex 6A (Competent Authorities).

3. The Parties shall ensure the information provided under paragraphs 1 and 2
(including Annex 6A) are kept up to date.

Article 6.6: Adaptation to Regional Conditions

l. The Parties recognise the concept of adaptation to regional conditions as set out in
Article 6 of the SPS Agreement, and shall take into account the relevant guidance of the
SPS Agreement and the relevant international standard-setting bodies.

2. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on the recognition of pest- and disease-
free areas, and areas of low pest or disease prevalence with the objective of acquiring
confidence in the procedures followed by each Party for the recognition of pest- and
disease-free areas, and areas of low pest- and low disease prevalence.

Article 6.7: Equivalence

1. The Parties recognise that the application of the equivalence principle set out in
Article 4 of the SPS Agreement is an important tool for trade facilitation and has mutual
benefits for both exporting and importing countries.

2. Equivalence can be accepted for a specific SPS measure or measures related to a
certain product or category of products, or on a system-wide basis.

3. The importing Party shall accept the sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the
exporting Party as equivalent if the exporting Party objectively demonstrates that its
measures achieve the importing Party’s appropriate level of sanitary and phytosanitary
protection. To facilitate a determination of equivalence, a Party shall, on request, advise
the other Party of the objective of any relevant sanitary or phytosanitary measures.

4. The Parties shall initiate the consultation process of equivalence determination
within a reasonable period of time. The determination of equivalence shall be finalised
after the demonstration of equivalence of the proposed measures by the exporting Party.

5. In case of multiple requests from the exporting Party, the Parties shall agree within
the Committee referred to in Article 6.10 (Sub-Committee on SPS) on order of priority in
which they shall initiate the process. The importing Party shall endeavour to prioritise the
requests for equivalence in respect of those products which it has historically imported
from the exporting Party.

6. The consideration by a Party of a request from the other Party for recognition of
the equivalence of its measures with regard to a specific product shall not in itself be a
reason to disrupt or suspend ongoing imports from that Party of the product in question.
When an equivalence determination is made, it shall be formally recorded and applied to
the trade between the Parties in the relevant area.

7. For the purpose of ensuring that sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the
exporting Party consistently meet the importing Party’s requirements, the exporting Party
shall, upon request, allow the auditing of its systems including procedures of inspection
and testing by the exporting Party.

Article 6.8: Procedure of Listing Establishments

I. After the initiation of the exporting Party, subject to each Party's internal
procedures and processes, and upon request of the importing Party, the exporting Party
shall inform the importing Party of its list of establishments which comply with the
importing Party’s requirements for approval and for which satisfactory sanitary guarantees
have been provided.

2. Upon request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall approve within 45
working days the list of establishments referred to in paragraph 1, without prior inspection
of individual establishments.

3. If the importing Party requests additional information, the time period referred to
in paragraph 2 shall be extended by up to 30 working days. Following the approval of the
list of establishments, the importing Party shall take necessary measures, in accordance
with its applicable legal procedures, to allow the importation of products concerned.

4. If the importing Party rejects the request for approval, it shall inform without delay
the exporting Party of the reasons upon which that rejection was based.

5. The Competent Authority of the importing Party has the right to suspend or
withdraw the import approval of an individual or several establishments in the event of
fundamental non-compliance. The importing Party will inform the exporting Party of such
decision.

Article 6.9: Communication and Exchange of Information

1. The Parties acknowledge the value of exchanging information on their respective
SPS measures.

2. Each Party shall provide timely and appropriate information directly to both
Contact Point and Competent Authorities of the other Party, in accordance with its WTO
obligations:

(a) where any changes in its sanitary and phytosanitary status, including
important epidemiological findings, may affect the trade between the

Parties;

on results of import checks in case of rejected or non-compliant
consignments; or

(c) on results of verification procedures, such as inspections or on site audits.

Article 6.10: Sub-Committee on SPS

1. The Parties shall establish a Sub-Committee on SPS measures (“the SPS Sub-
Committee’’), under the Joint Committee described in Article 13.1 (Establishment of the
Joint Committee) of this Agreement, to facilitate cooperation and to consider any matter
relating to the implementation of this Chapter.

2. The Sub-Committee’s functions shall include:

(a) developing the necessary procedures or arrangements for the
implementation of this Chapter;

monitoring the implementation of this Chapter;

providing a forum to exchange information, expertise, and experience in the
field of SPS matters and for discussion of problems arising from the
application of certain sanitary or phytosanitary measures with a view to
reaching mutually acceptable solutions and promptly addressing any
matters that may create unnecessary obstacles to trade among the Parties;
and

(d) carrying out any other functions as mutually agreed by the Parties.
In addition, the Sub-Committee’s functions may include:

(a) promoting the use of international standards by Parties in their respective
adoption and application of SPS measures; and

(b) identifying, initiating and reviewing technical assistance projects and
activities among the Parties.

4. The Parties may inform each other through the SPS Sub-Committee of decisions
related to the authorisation of imports, exchange of information, transparency, recognition
of regionalisation, equivalency and alternative measures, and any other matter referred to
in the above paragraphs.

5. The SPS Sub-Committee shall consist of appropriate representatives of each Party
with responsibility for SPS measures and all decisions made by the Sub-Committee shall
be by mutual agreement.

6. The SPS Sub-Committee may establish technical working groups as required to
undertake specific tasks.

7. The SPS Sub-Committee shall meet in person within one year from the date of entry
into force of this Agreement and annually thereafter, when practicable, as mutually
determined by the Parties. Meetings may be conducted via teleconference, video
conference, or through other means as mutually agreed by the Parties.

Article 6.11: Technical Cooperation

1. The Parties agree to explore the opportunity for technical cooperation in SPS areas,
with a view to enhance their understanding the other Party's regulatory systems, build
capacities of the Parties, foster confidence between Competent Authorities of the Parties,
and minimise negative effects on bilateral trade.

2. The Parties shall give due consideration to cooperation relating to SPS issues. Such
cooperation, which shall be on mutually agreed terms and conditions, may include, but is
not limited to:

(a) furthering the exchange of experience and cooperation in the development
and application of domestic SPS measures as well as international
standards;

strengthening cooperation with respect to, inter alia, risk analysis
methodology, disease or pest control methods, and laboratory testing
techniques;

developing exchange programs for relevant officials of Competent
Authorities, for the purposes of building capacity and confidence of the
Parties regarding animal disease and plant pest management;

exchanging information, upon request of a Party, on the outbreak of any
significant animal disease or incident related to food safety, and follow-up
measures including related domestic regulations and their explanations;

(e) enhancing cooperation and exchange of experience between the WTO SPS
Enquiry Points or the Competent Authorities of the Parties;

(f) considering potential joint research and sharing the result of such research
in SPS areas including animal disease, plant pest and food safety; and

(g) any other cooperative activity mutually agreed by the Parties.

Article 6.12: Consultations

1. Where a Party considers that a SPS measure affecting trade between the Parties
warrants further discussion, it may, through the Contact Point, request a full explanation of
the SPS measure and if necessary, request to hold consultations to resolve the issue. The
other Party shall respond in a timely manner to any request for such explanations or
consultations.

2. The Parties shall make every effort to resolve the issue through consultations on a
timeline mutually agreed upon by both sides. Should the consultations fail to achieve
resolution, the matter shall be forwarded to the Joint Committee referred to in Article 13.1
(Establishment of the Joint Committee).

Article 6.13: Emergency Measures

1. Emergency measures imposed by an importing Party shall be notified in writing to
the other Party through the Competent Authorities of the exporting country within two
working days of the decision to implement them along with the associated reasons
including any serious or significant human, animal or plant life or health risk, food
emergencies that could affect the commodities for which trade takes place. Upon request,
consultations between the Competent Authorities shall be held within 10 working days of
the notification. All communication shall also be forwarded to the designated Contact
Points. The Parties shall consider any information provided through such consultations.

2. The importing Party shall consider the information provided by the exporting Party,
in a timely manner, when making decisions with respect to consignments that, at the time
of adoption of emergency measures, are being transported between the Parties. The
importing Party shall consider the most suitable and proportional solution in order to avoid
unnecessary disruptions to trade.

CHAPTER 7
TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE
Article 7.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) TBT Agreement means the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, as may
be amended.

(b) Technical Regulation, Standard and Conformity Assessment Procedures shall
have the meanings assigned to those terms in Annex 1 of the TBT Agreement.
Article 7.2: Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are to:
(a) increase and facilitate trade through:
(i) enhancing transparency;
(11) promoting good regulatory practices and greater regulatory cooperation; and
(111) strengthening joint cooperation between the Parties.
(b) ensure that technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures
do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade.
Article 7.3: Scope
1. This Chapter applies to the preparation, adoption, and application of all technical

regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures that may, directly or indirectly,
affect trade in goods between the Parties.

2. Technical specifications prepared by governmental bodies for production or
consumption requirements of such bodies which are covered by Chapter 10 (Government
Procurement), to the extent they apply, are not subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

3. This Chapter does not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures as defined in
Annex A, paragraph 1 of the WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement), which are covered in Chapter 6 (Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures).

Article 7.4: General Provisions
The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under the TBT Agreement.

2. The following provisions of the TBT Agreement are incorporated into and made part
of this Agreement:

(a) Articles 2 to 9 of the TBT Agreement;
(b) Annexes | and 3 of the TBT Agreement.

3. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from adopting or
maintaining technical regulations, standards or conformity assessment procedures in
accordance with its rights and obligations under this Agreement and the TBT Agreement.

Article 7.5: International Standards, Guides and Recommendations

1. The Parties recognise the important role that international standards, guides and
recommendations can play in supporting greater regulatory alignment, good regulatory
practice and reducing unnecessary barriers to trade.

2. In this respect, and further to Articles 2.4 and 5.4 and Annex 3 of the TBT Agreement,
to determine whether there is an international standard, guide or recommendation within the
meaning of Articles 2 and 5 and Annex 3 of the TBT Agreement, each Party shall apply the
Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to

Trade Since I January 1995, (G/TBT/1/Rev.13), as may be revised, issued by the WTO
Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade.

Article 7.6: Conformity Assessment Procedures

1. The Parties recognise that a broad range of mechanisms exists to facilitate the
acceptance in a Party's territory of the results of conformity assessment procedures conducted
in the other Party's territory. Such mechanisms may include the:

(a) use of accreditation to qualify conformity assessment bodies including
designation of conformity assessment bodies;

acceptance of the results of conformity assessment procedures conducted by
conformity assessment bodies located in the other Party’s territory with respect
to specific technical regulations;

recognition of existing regional, international and multilateral recognition
agreements and arrangements between conformity assessment bodies;

designation of conformity assessment bodies located in the territory of the
other Party to carry out conformity assessment activities, or recognition of the
other Party’s designation of conformity assessment bodies;

unilateral recognition of the results of conformity assessment procedures
performed in the other Party’s territory;

acceptance of a supplier’s declaration of conformity; and

facilitation of voluntary arrangements between conformity assessment bodies
located in the territory of each Party to accept the results of each other’s
conformity assessment procedures.

2. The Parties may exchange information on these and other similar mechanisms with a
view to facilitating acceptance of conformity assessment results proposed by a Party.

3. If a Party declines:

(a) A request from the other Party to engage in negotiations or conclude an
agreement on facilitating recognition in its territory of the results of conformity
assessment procedures;

the results of a conformity assessment procedure conducted in the territory of
the other Party by a recognised conformity assessment body under bilateral
recognition agreement and arrangement; or

accreditation, designation or other recognition under bilateral or multilateral
recognition agreement or arrangement to which the Parties are one of the
signatures or a side to, with respect to a body assessing conformity with that
technical regulation or standard in the territory of the other Party,

it shall explain the reasons for its decision.

Article 7.7: Transparency

1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of transparency in decision-making,
including providing a meaningful opportunity for persons to provide comments on proposed
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures. Where a Party publishes a notice
or notification under Article 2.9 or 5.6 of the TBT Agreement, it:

(a) may include in the notice the objectives and rationale of the proposed technical
regulation or conformity assessment procedure; drafting bodies and
development period thereof; and

shall transmit the notification with the proposal electronically to the other Party
through the Enquiry Point the Party has established under Article 10 of the
TBT Agreement, at the same time as it notifies WTO Members of the proposal.
Each Party should allow at least 60 days for the other Party to make comments
in writing on the proposals. A Party that is able to extend a time limit
beyond 60 days, for example, 90 days, is encouraged to do so.

2. A Party shall give appropriate consideration to the comments received from the other
Party when a proposed technical regulation is submitted for public comment and, upon
request of the other Party, provide written answers to the comments made by such other Party.

3. Each Party is encouraged to provide sufficient time between the end of the comment
period and the adoption of the notified technical regulation or conformity assessment
procedure, for its consideration of, and preparation of responses to, the comments received.

4. The Parties shall ensure that all adopted technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures are publicly available.
Article 7.8: Information Exchange and Technical Discussions

1. A Party may request technical discussions with the other Party with the aim of
resolving any matter that arises under this Chapter.

2. The Parties shall discuss the matter raised within 60 days of the date of the request. If
the requesting Party considers that the matter is urgent, it may request that any discussions
take place within a shorter time frame. The responding Party shall give positive consideration
to that request.

3. The Parties shall make every effort to resolve the matter as expeditiously as possible.
4. Requests for information or technical discussions and communications shall be
conveyed through the respective contact points designated pursuant to Article 7.11 (Contact
Points).

Article 7.9: Cooperation on TBT Related Issues

1. With a view to facilitate trade, the Parties shall strengthen their cooperation in the field
of technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures.

2. The Parties recognise that there might be a broad range of mechanisms to support
cooperation initiatives, including:

(a) promoting the use of good regulatory practices to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment
procedures;

giving favourable consideration, upon request of the other Party, to any sector
specific proposal for further cooperation;

increasing their bilateral cooperation in the relevant regional and international
organisations and fora dealing with the issues covered by this Chapter;

providing technical advice and assistance, on mutually agreed terms and
conditions, to improve practices related to the development, implementation
and review of technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment
procedures;

providing technical assistance and cooperation, on mutually agreed terms and
conditions, to build capacity and support the implementation of this Chapter.

Article 7.10: Sub-Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

1. The Parties hereby establish a Sub-Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade
(hereinafter: the Sub-Committee), composed of relevant government representatives of each
Party and coordinated by:

(a) In the case of Israel: the Ministry of Economy and Industry, Foreign Trade
Administration or its successor;

(b) In the case of Viet Nam: the Ministry of Science and Technology or its
successor.

2. Through the Sub-Committee, the Parties shall strengthen their joint work in the fields
of technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures with a view to
facilitating trade between the Parties;

3. The Sub-Committee’s functions include:

(a) monitoring the implementation and operation of this Chapter and identifying
any potential amendments to or interpretations of those commitments pursuant
to Chapter 13 (Administration of the Agreement);
monitoring any technical discussions on matters that arise under this Chapter;
reviewing this Chapter in light of any developments under the TBT
Agreement, and developing recommendations for amendments to this Chapter

in light of those developments;

reporting to the Joint Committee on the implementation and operation of this
Chapter;

carrying out other functions as may be delegated by the Joint Committee of the
Agreement;

deciding on priority areas of mutual interest for future work under this Chapter
and considering proposals for new sector-specific initiatives or other
initiatives;

encouraging cooperation between the Parties in matters that pertains to this
Chapter, including the development, review or modification of technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures; and

(h) facilitating the identification of technical capacity needs.

Article 7.11 : Contact Points

1. Contact Points are responsible for communications relating to matters arising under
this Chapter including ensuring communication with the relevant institutions and authorities
in their respective territories as necessary for the implementation and administration of this
Chapter.

The Contact Points are:
(a) For Viet Nam, Directorate for Standards, Metrology and Quality under the
Ministry of Science and Technology, or its successor; and

(b) For Israel, the Foreign Trade Administration in the Ministry of Economy and
Industry or its successor.

3. Each Party shall provide the other Party with the contact details of its contact point
and shall promptly notify of any change or any amendment to the information regarding its
contact point.

CHAPTER 8
CROSS-BORDER TRADE IN SERVICES

Article 8.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

aircraft repair and maintenance services means such activities when undertaken on an
aircraft or a part thereof while it is withdrawn from service and does not include so-called line

maintenance;

commercial presence means any type of business or professional establishment, including
through:

(a) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of an enterprise, or

(b) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office,

within the territory of a Party for the purpose of supplying a service;
computer reservation system services means services provided by computerised systems
that contain information about air carriers’ schedules, availability, fares, and fare rules,

through which reservations can be made or tickets may be issued;

cross-border trade in services or cross-border supply of services means the supply of a
service:

(a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party;

in the territory of a Party by a person of that Party to a person of the other Party;
or

(c) by a natural person of a Party in the territory of the other Party,

but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by a covered investment;

enterprise means an “enterprise” as defined in Article 9.1 (Definitions), and a branch of an
enterprise;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise organised or constituted under the laws of a Party,
or a branch located in the territory of that Party, and carrying out substantial business activities
there;

financial services mean any service of a financial nature including those defined in paragraph
5(a) of the Annex on Financial Services of GATS;

selling and marketing of air transport services means opportunities for the air carrier
concerned to sell and market freely its air transport services, including all aspects of marketing

such as market research, advertising, and distribution. These activities do not include the pricing
of air transport services nor the applicable conditions; and

service supplier of a Party means a person of that Party that supplies a service!.

Article 8.2: Scope

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party affecting cross-
border trade in services by service suppliers of the other Party. Such measures include measures
affecting:

(a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale, and delivery of a service;
the purchase or use of, or payment for, a service; and

(c) the access to and use of distribution, transport, or telecommunications networks
and services in connection with the supply of a service.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, measures adopted or maintained by a Party means
measures adopted or maintained by:

(a) central or local governments and authorities; and

b non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central or local
g p g y
governments or authorities.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, Articles 8.5 (Market Access), 8.8 (Domestic
Regulation), and 8.9 (Transparency in Developing and Applying Regulations) shall also apply
to measures adopted or maintained by a Party affecting the supply of a service in its territory
through commercial presence.

4. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, this Chapter shall not apply to:
(a) _ financial services’;
government procurement;
air services, including domestic and international air transportation services,

whether scheduled or non-scheduled, and related services in support of air
services, other than:

' For the purposes of Articles 8.3 (National Treatment) and 8.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), “service
suppliers” has the same meaning as “services and service suppliers” as used in Articles II and XVII of GATS.

? For greater certainty, this exclusion includes financial service suppliers as defined in the Annex on Financial
Services of GATS.

(1) aircraft repair and maintenance services during which an aircraft is
withdrawn from service;

(11) the selling and marketing of air transport services; and
(111) computer reservation system (CRS) services; or

(d) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-supported loans,
guarantees, and insurance.

5. This Chapter shall not apply to services supplied in the exercise of governmental
authority in a Party’s territory. A service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority

means any service which is supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with one
or more service suppliers.

Article 8.3: National Treatment

Each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own service suppliers.

Article 8.4: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment?

Each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to service suppliers of a non-Party.

Article 8.5: Market Access

No Party may adopt or maintain, either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of
its entire territory, measures that:

1. impose limitations on:

(a) the number of service suppliers, whether in the form of numerical quotas,
monopolies, exclusive service suppliers, or the requirement of an economic
needs test;

the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas
or the requirement of an economic needs test;

the total number of service operations or the total quantity of services output
expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the
requirement of an economic needs test*; or

> For greater certainty, nothing in this Article shall be interpreted as extending the scope of this Chapter.
4 Subparagraph (c) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of services.

the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a particular service
sector or that a service supplier may employ and who are necessary for, and
directly related to, the supply of a specific service in the form of numerical
quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; or

2. restrict or require specific types of legal entities or joint ventures through which a
service supplier may supply a service.

Article 8.6: Local Presence

No Party may require a service supplier of the other Party to establish or maintain a
representative office or any form of enterprise, or to be resident, in its territory as a condition
for the cross-border supply of a service.

Article 8.7: Non-Conforming Measures

1. Articles 8.3 (National Treatment), 8.4 (Most Favoured Nation Treatment), 8.5 (Market
Access) and 8.6 (Local Presence) shall not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at:

(1) the central level of government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule
in Annex I (Reservations for Existing Measures) ;

(ii) a local level of government;

the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to
in subparagraph (a); or

an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a)
to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the
measure, as it existed at the date of the entry into force of this Agreement with
Article 8.3 (National Treatment), Article 8.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment), Article 8.5 (Market Access) and Article 8.6 (Local Presence).

2. Articles 8.3 (National Treatment) through 8.6 (Local Presence) shall not apply to any
measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, sub-sectors, or activities as set
out in its Schedule in Annex II (Reservations for Future Measures).

Article 8.8: Domestic Regulation

1. Where a Party requires authorisation for the supply of a service, the Party’s competent
authorities shall, within a reasonable time after the submission of an application considered
complete under its laws and regulations, inform the applicant of the decision concerning the

application. At the request of the applicant, the Party’s competent authorities shall provide,
without undue delay, information concerning the status of the application. This obligation shall
not apply to authorisation requirements that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors,
sub-sectors, or activities as set out in its Schedule in Annex II (Reservations for Future
Measures).

2. With a view to ensuring that measures related to qualification requirements and
procedures, technical standards, and licensing requirements do not constitute unnecessary
barriers to trade in services, while recognising the right to regulate and to introduce new
regulations on the supply of services in order to meet national policy objectives, each Party
shall endeavour to ensure, as appropriate for individual sectors, that such measures are:

(a) based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and the ability
to supply the service;

not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service; and

(c) in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves a restriction on the supply
of the service.

3. If the results of the negotiations related to Article VI:4 of the GATS (or the results of
any similar negotiations undertaken in other multilateral fora in which the Parties participate)
enter into effect, this Article shall be amended, as appropriate, after consultations among the
Parties, to bring those results into effect under this Agreement. The Parties shall coordinate
such consultations, as appropriate.

Article 8.9: Transparency in Developing and Applying Regulations°

Further to Chapter 12 (Transparency):

(a) Each Party shall establish or maintain appropriate mechanisms for responding
to inquiries from interested persons regarding its regulations related to the
subject matter of this Chapter.

To the extent possible, each Party shall allow reasonable time between the
publication of final regulations related to the subject matter of this Chapter and
their effective date.

Article 8.10: Recognition

1. For the purposes of the fulfilment, in whole or in part, of its standards or criteria for the
authorisation, licensing, or certification of services suppliers, and subject to the requirements
of paragraph 5, a Party may recognise the education or experience obtained, requirements met,
or licenses or certifications granted in a particular country. Such recognition, which may be
achieved through harmonisation or otherwise, may be based upon an agreement or arrangement
with the country concerned or may be accorded autonomously.

> For greater certainty, “regulations” includes regulations establishing or applying to licensing authorisation or
criteria at the central and local levels of government.

2. Where a Party recognises, autonomously or by agreement or arrangement, the education
or experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certifications granted in the territory
of a non-Party, nothing in Article 8.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) shall be construed to
require the Party to accord such recognition to the education or experience obtained,
requirements met, or licenses or certifications granted in the territory of the other Party.

3. On written request of the other Party, where appropriate, a Party shall endeavour to
provide information concerning any recognition agreement or arrangement that the Party or
relevant bodies in either Party are a party to, within a reasonable period of time.

4. A Party that is a party to an agreement or arrangement of the type referred to in
paragraph 1, whether existing or future, shall afford adequate opportunity for the other Party, if
the other Party is interested, to negotiate its accession to such an agreement or arrangement or
to negotiate a comparable one with it. Where a Party accords recognition autonomously, it shall
afford adequate opportunity for the other Party to demonstrate that education, experience,
licenses, or certifications obtained or requirements met in the other Party’s territory should be
recognised.

5. No Party may accord recognition in a manner that would constitute a means of
discrimination between countries in the application of its standards or criteria for the
authorisation, licensing, or certification of service suppliers, or a disguised restriction on trade
in services.

Article 8.11: Payments and Transfers

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers and payments related to the cross-border supply of
services to be made freely and without delay into and out of its territory.

2. Each Party shall permit such transfers and payments related to the cross-border supply
of services to be made in a freely usable currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing at
the time of transfer.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1| and 2, a Party may prevent or delay a transfer or payment
through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith application of its laws related to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency, or the protection of the rights of creditors;
issuing, trading, or dealing in securities, futures, options, or derivatives;

financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law
enforcement, or financial regulatory authorities;

criminal or penal offences; or

ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or administrative
proceedings.

Article 8.12: Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments

1. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the imposition of restrictions to safeguard the
balance of payments.

2. In the event of serious balance-of-payments and external financial difficulties or threat
thereof, a Party may adopt or maintain restrictions on trade in services, including on payments
or transfers for transactions. It is recognised that particular pressures on the balance of payments
of a Party in the process of economic development or economic transition may necessitate the
use of restrictions to ensure, inter alia, the maintenance of a level of financial reserves adequate
for the implementation of its programme of economic development or economic transition.

3. The restrictions referred to in paragraph 2:
(a) shall not discriminate against the other Party;

shall be consistent with the Articles of the Agreement of the International
Monetary Fund done at New Hampshire on July 22, 1944;

shall avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic, and financial
interests of the other Party;

shall not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances described in
paragraph 2;

(e) shall be temporary and be phased out progressively as the situation specified in
paragraph 2 improves.

4. In determining the incidence of such restrictions, Parties may give priority to the supply
of services which are more essential to their economic or development programmes. However,
such restrictions shall not be adopted or maintained for the purpose of protecting a particular
service sector.

5. Any restrictions adopted or maintained under paragraph 2, or any changes therein, shall
be promptly notified to the Joint Committee.

Article 8.13: Denial of Benefits
1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of the other Party if
the service supplier is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party, and the
denying Party:
(a) does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non-Party; or
adopts or maintains measures with respect to the non-Party or a person of the

non-Party that prohibit transactions with the enterprise or that would be violated
or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to the enterprise.

Article 8.14: Exceptions

Article 8.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) shall not be construed so as to oblige one Party
to extend to the service suppliers of the other Party the benefit of any treatment, preference or
privilege resulting from any existing or future customs union, free trade area agreement,
common market, economic union, monetary union or similar international agreement, to which
either Party is or will be a party.

CHAPTER 9: INVESTMENT

Section A: General Provisions

Article 9.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

claimant means an investor of a Party that is a party to an investment dispute with the
other Party;

covered investment means, with respect to a Party, an investment:
(a) in its territory;
(b) directly or indirectly owned or controlled by an investor of the other Party; and

(c) existing on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or made or acquired
thereafter;

disputing parties means both the claimant and the respondent;

enterprise means any legal person or any other entity duly constituted or organised
under the applicable legislation, including any corporation, trust, partnership, sole
proprietorship, joint venture, association, organisation or company;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise that is constituted or organised under the
legislation of that Party and has substantial business activities in the territory of that

Party;

freely usable currency means "freely usable currency" as defined under the Articles of
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;

ICSID means the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes;

ICSID Additional Facility Rules means the Rules Governing the Additional Facility
for the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes;

ICSID Convention means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States, done at Washington, March 18, 1965;

investment means every kind of asset, made in accordance with the legislation of the
Party in whose territory the investment is made, that an investor owns or controls,
directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics of an investment, such as the

commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of gain or profit, and the
assumption of risk. Forms that an investment may take include’:

(a) an enterprise;

(b) shares, stock and other forms of equity participation in an enterprise;
(c) bonds, debentures and other forms of debt of an enterprise;

(d) a loan to an enterprise;

(e) futures, options and other derivatives;

(f) rights under contract, including turnkey, construction, management, production,
or revenue-sharing contracts;

claims to money and to any performance under contract having a financial
value;

intellectual property rights and goodwill;

(1) concessions and similar rights conferred by law or by contract, including
concessions to search for, extract or exploit natural resources; and

(j) any other movable and immovable property, and any related property rights,
such as leases, mortgages, liens and pledges;

For greater certainty, investment shall not include:
(a) public debt;
(b) claims to money that arise solely from commercial contracts for the sale of
goods or services by a natural person or enterprise in the territory of a Party to

a natural person or enterprise in the territory of the other Party;

(c) the extension of credit, including bank loans, in connection with a commercial
transaction, such as trade financing; or

(d) an order or judgment entered in a judicial or administrative action, or an arbitral
award;

investor of a Party means:

' An investment includes the amounts yielded by an investment, in particular, profit, interest, capital
gains, dividends, royalties and fees. A change in the form in which assets are invested does not affect
their character as an investment, provided that the change is effected in accordance with the applicable
legislation of the Party in whose territory the investment is made.

(a) with respect to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam:
1. an enterprise of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam; or

a natural person who is a national of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
but not a national or a permanent resident of the State of Israel; and

(b) with respect to the State of Israel:
1. an enterprise of the state of Israel; or

a natural person who is a national or permanent resident of the State of
Israel but not a national of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam;

that has made, is making or seeks to make an investment in the territory of the other
Party;

legislation with respect to a Party means the laws, regulations and administrative orders
of that Party;

New York Convention means the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of
Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York, 10 June 1958;

respondent means the Party that is a party to an investment dispute;
Secretary-General means the Secretary-General of ICSID;

TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement;

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules means the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law, as revised in 2010.

Article 9.2: Scope and Coverage
1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
(a) investors of the other Party;

(b) covered investments.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party with
regard to financial services.

3. For greater certainty, this Chapter shall not bind either Party in relation to an
act or fact that took place or a situation that ceased to exist before the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.

4. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter, the
other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency, except with regard to
Article 9.16 (Taxation Measures).

5. This Chapter shall not apply to any measure relating to the conduct of tenders
or bidding processes of government procurement.

6. For greater certainty, the mere fact that a subsidy” or grant has not been issued,
renewed or maintained, or has been modified or reduced, by a Party, does not constitute
a breach of this Chapter, even if there is loss or damage to the covered investment as a
result.

Article 9.3: Right to Regulate

l. For the purposes of this Agreement, the Parties reaffirm their right to regulate
within their territories to achieve legitimate policy objectives, such as the protection of
public health, safety, the environment or public morals, social or consumer protection
or the promotion and protection of cultural diversity, through the good faith application
of their laws and regulations.

2. For greater certainty, the mere fact that a Party regulates, including through a
modification to its laws, in a manner which negatively affects an investment or
interferes with an investor’s expectations, including its expectations of profits, does not
amount to a breach of an obligation under this Agreement.

Section B: Non-Discrimination and Liberalisation of Investment

Article 9.4: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with respect
to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favourable
than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments in its territory of its own

*For Viet Nam, “subsidy” includes investment incentives, and investment assistance such as production
site assistance, human resources training and competitiveness strengthening activities, such as assistance
for technology, research and development, legal aids, market information and promotion.

investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of investments in its territory.

Article 9.5: Most-Favoured Nation Treatment

l. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors of any non-Party with
respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favourable
than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments in its territory of investors of
any non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of investments in its territory.

3. For greater certainty, the treatment referred to in this Article does not encompass
definitions or any investor-state dispute settlement procedures or mechanism, including
mechanisms and procedures similar to those set out in Section D (Investor — State
Dispute Settlement).

4. For greater certainty, substantive provisions in other international investment
treaties and other trade agreements where not accompanied by measures that are
adopted or maintained by a Party pursuant to those provisions, do not, by themselves
constitute “treatment”, and thus cannot give rise to a breach of this Article.*

Article 9.6: Performance Requirements

1. Neither Party may, in connection with the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of an investment in
its territory of an investor of the other Party, impose or enforce any requirement or
enforce any commitment or undertaking:

(a) to export a given level or percentage of goods or services;

(b) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

(c) to purchase, use, or accord a preference to goods produced or services
provided in its territory, or to purchase goods or services from a natural
person or an enterprise in its territory;
to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value

of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated with
such investment;

> For greater certainty, the Parties reaffirm their understanding that this article shall be interpreted in
accordance with the principle of ejusdem generis.

(e) to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that such investment
produces or supplies by relating such sales in any way to the volume or
value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings;

to transfer technology, a production process or other proprietary
knowledge to a natural person or an enterprise in its territory, except those
undertaken in a manner not inconsistent with the TRIPS Agreement.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 do not preclude either Party from conditioning
the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with establishment,
acquisition, expansion, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of an
investment in its territory of an investor of the other Party, on compliance with:

(a) any requirement other than the requirements set forth in subparagraphs
1(b), 1(c), 1(d), and 1(e);

(b) a requirement to locate production, supply or acquire a service, train or
employ workers, construct or expand particular facilities, or carry out
research and development, in its territory;

the requirements set forth in subparagraphs 1(b) and l(c), when the
requirements relating to the content of goods necessary to qualify for
preferential tariffs or preferential quotas are imposed by an importing
Party; and

3. Subparagraphs 1(a), 1(b) and 1(c) do not apply to qualification requirements for
goods or services with respect to export promotion.

4. Subparagraph 1(f) shall not apply when a requirement is imposed or the
commitment or undertaking is enforced by a court of justice, administrative tribunal or
competition authority to remedy a determined violation of competition laws.

5. This Article does not preclude enforcement of any commitment, undertaking,
or requirement between private parties, where a Party did not impose or require the
commitment, undertaking, or requirement.

6. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 does not apply to any requirement other than
the requirements set out in that paragraph.

Article 9.7: Senior Management and Board of Directors

I. No Party may require that an enterprise of that Party, that is a covered
investment, appoint to senior management positions a natural person of any particular
nationality.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a Party may require that a majority or less of the
board of directors, or any committee thereof, of an enterprise of that Party that is a
covered investment, be a national of that Party or resident in the territory of that Party,
provided that the requirement does not materially impair the ability of the investor to
exercise control over its investment.

Article 9.8: Non-Conforming Measures

l. Article 9.4 (National Treatment), Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured Nation
Treatment), Article 9.6 (Performance Requirements) and Article 9.7 (Senior
Management and Boards of Directors) shall not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at:

(1) the central level of government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule
to Annex I;

(11) a local level of government;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred
to in subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment or modification to any non-conforming measure referred to
in subparagraph (a), provided that the amendment or modification does not
decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the
date of entry into force of this Agreement, with Articles 9.4 (National
Treatment), 9.5 (Most-Favoured National Treatment), 9.6 (Performance
Requirement) and 9.7 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors).

2. Articles 9.4 (National Treatment), 9.5 (Most-Favoured Nation Treatment), 9.6
(Performance Requirements) and 9.7 (Senior Management and Board of Directors)
shall not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors,
sub-sectors or activities set out in its Schedule in Annex II.

3. Neither Party shall, under any measure adopted after the date of entry into force
of this Agreement and covered by its Schedule in Annex II, require an investor of the
other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an investment
that exists at the time the measure becomes effective.

4. The Parties confirm their understanding that, when a new sector, which does
not exist at the time of the entry into force of this Agreement, emerges in a Party after
the date of entry into force of this Agreement and that Party, therefore, wishes to amend
the Annexes to this Chapter, the Parties shall, upon request by that Party, enter
immediately into discussion with a view to amending the Annexes.

5. Articles 9.4 (National Treatment) and 9.5 (Most-Favoured Nation Treatment)
shall not apply to any measure covered by the exceptions to, or derogations from,
obligations under the TRIPS Agreement.

6. Articles 9.4 (National Treatment), 9.5 (Most-Favoured Nation Treatment), 9.6
(Performance Requirements) and 9.7 (Senior Management and Board of Directors)
shall not apply to:

(a) any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to government
procurement;

Subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-
supported loans, guarantees, and insurance.

Article 9.9: Special Formalities and Information Requirements

1. Nothing in Article 9.4 (National Treatment) shall be construed to prevent a Party
from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities in
connection with covered investments, such as a requirement that covered investments
be legally constituted or registered under the requirements of its legislation, provided
that such formalities do not materially impair the protections afforded by the Party to
investors of the other Party and to covered investments pursuant to this Chapter and are

not used as means of avoiding the Party’s commitments or obligations under this
Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding Article 9.4 (National Treatment) and Article 9.5 (Most-
Favoured Nation Treatment), a Party may require an investor of the other Party or its
covered investment to provide information concerning that investment solely for
informational or statistical purposes. The Party shall protect such information that is
confidential from any disclosure that would prejudice the competitive position of the
investor or its covered investment.

Section C: Investment Promotion and Protection

Article 9.10: Scope of Investment Protection

This Section applies to investors of a Party who had made covered investment
in the territory of the other Party, and their covered investments.

Article 9.11: Treatment of Investments

1. Covered investments shall be accorded fair and equitable treatment and shall
enjoy full protection and security in the territory of the other Party in accordance with
applicable customary international law.

2. For greater certainty, "full protection and security" refers to the Party’s
obligations to act as may be reasonably necessary to protect the physical security of
investors and covered investments.

3. For greater certainty, the “full protection and security” does not imply, in any
case, better police protection than that accorded to nationals of the Party where the
investment has been made.

4. For greater certainty, a determination that there has been a breach of another
provision of this Agreement, or of a separate international agreement, does not establish
that there has been a breach of this Article.

Article 9.12: Losses and Compensation

1. Notwithstanding paragraph 9.8(6)(b), each Party shall accord to investors of the
other Party that have suffered a loss or damage relating to their investments in the
territory of the former Party due to war or other armed conflict, revolution, a state of
national emergency, revolt, insurrection, riot or other such similar activity in the
territory of that former Party, treatment, as regards restitution, indemnification,
compensation or any other settlement, that is no less favourable than that which it
accords to its own investors or investors of a non- Party.

2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, if an investor, suffers a loss in the territory of
the other Party resulting from:

(a) requisitioning of its property by the Party's forces or authorities; or

(b) destruction of its property by the Party's forces or authorities, which was
not caused in combat action or was not required by the necessity of the
situation,

the Party shall provide the investor with restitution or adequate compensation for such
loss.

3. Any payment under this Article shall be effectively realisable, freely
transferable and freely convertible at the market exchange rate into freely usable
currencies.

Article 9.13: Expropriation and Compensation‘

l. A Party shall not expropriate or nationalise a covered investment either directly,
or indirectly through measures having an effect equivalent to expropriation or
nationalisation (“expropriation”), except:

4 This Article shall be interpreted in accordance with Annex 9A(Expropriation).

for a public purpose;
when made in accordance with the legislation of the Party;
(c) in a non-discriminatory manner; and
(d) when accompanied by compensation, in accordance with paragraph 2.
2. The compensation shall:
(a) be paid without delay and in a freely usable currency;

be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment
immediately before the expropriation took place;

not reflect any change in value occurring because the intended
expropriation had become known earlier;

be fully realisable and freely transferable; and

(e) include interest, at a commercially reasonable rate for that currency,
accrued from the date of expropriation until the date of payment.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, where Viet Nam is the expropriating Party,
any measure of direct expropriation relating to land shall be:

(a) for a purpose in accordance with the applicable domestic legislation®; and

(b) upon payment of compensation that follow the general trends in the market
value of the land use right, while recognising the applicable domestic legislation
which will be implemented in good faith in a non-discriminatory, and equitable
manner.

4. Without prejudice to Section D (Investor — State Dispute Settlement), the
investors affected shall have a right, under the legislation of the Party making the
expropriation, to prompt review, by a judicial or other independent authority of that
Party, of the legality of the expropriation and of the valuation of their investment, in
accordance with the principles set out in this Article.

5. This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted in
relation to intellectual property rights in accordance with the TRIPS Agreement, or to
the revocation, limitation, or creation of intellectual property rights, to the extent that

° The applicable domestic legislation is Law on Land 2013 (Viet Nam) and Decree No. 44/2014/ND-CP
dated 15 May 2014 Regulating Land Prices, as amended on the date of entry into force of this Agreement
for Viet Nam.

such issuance, revocation, limitation, or creation is consistent with the TRIPS
Agreement.

Article 9.14: Transfers®

l. Each Party shall permit all transfers relating to a covered investment to be made
freely and without delay into and out of its territory. Such transfers include:

(a) contributions to capital, including the initial contribution and additional
amounts to maintain, or increase the investment;

(b) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalties, management fees,
technical assistance fees and other fees, or other current incomes accruing from the

covered investment;

(c) proceeds from the sale or liquidation of all or any part of the covered
investment;

(d) payments made under a contract entered into by the investor or the
covered investment, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;

(e) payments made in accordance with Articles 9.12 (Losses and
Compensation) and 9.13 (Expropriation and Compensation); and

(f) payments arising out of a dispute referred to in Section D (Investor —
State Dispute Settlement).

2. Each Party shall allow such transfers to be made in a freely usable currency at
the market rate of exchange prevailing at the time of transfer.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent or delay a transfer
through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of its legislation
relating to:
(a) the payment of taxes and dues;
bankruptcy, insolvency or the protection of the rights of a creditor;
(c) issuing, trading or dealing in securities futures, options or derivatives;

(d) criminal or penal offences;

(e) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to
assist law enforcement, taxation authorities or financial regulatory authorities;

6 For greater certainty, Annex 9-B (Temporary Safeguard Measures) shall apply to Article 9.14
(Transfers).

(f) ensuring compliance with an order or judgment in judicial or
administrative proceedings; or

(g) social security, public retirement, or compulsory savings schemes.

Article 9.15: Subrogation

1. If a Party or its designated agency makes a payment to one of its investors under
a guarantee, a contract of insurance or other form of indemnity it has entered into in
respect of an investment in the territory of the other Party, the other Party shall
recognise:

(a) the assignment, to the former Party or its designated agency, of any right
or claim of the investor in respect of such investment, that formed the
basis of such payment; and

the right of the former Party or its designated agency to exercise by
virtue of subrogation such right or claim to the same extent as the
original right or claim of the investor.

2. For greater certainty, the Party or its designated agency shall be entitled in all
circumstances to:

(a) the same treatment in respect of the rights and claims acquired by it by
virtue of the assignment referred to in paragraph 1; and

the same payments due pursuant to those rights and claims, as the
investor referred to in paragraph | was entitled to receive by virtue of
this Chapter in respect of the investment.

3. If a Party or its designated agency has made a payment to its investor and has
taken over rights and claims of the investor under paragraph 1, that investor shall not,
unless authorised in writing by the Party or its designated agency to act on behalf of the
Party or its designated agency making the payment, pursue those rights and claims
against the other Party. In the exercise of subrogated rights or claims, a Party or its
designated agency exercising such rights or claims shall disclose evidence of the
subrogation or transfer of rights from the investor to the Party or its designated agency
to the other Party.

4. In the exercise of subrogated rights or claims, a Party or the agency of the Party
exercising such rights or claims shall disclose the coverage of the claims arrangement
with its investors to the relevant Party.

Article 9.16: Taxation Measures’

1. Nothing in this Section shall impose obligations with respect to taxation
measures except as expressly provided in paragraph 3.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of either Party
under any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement
and any such convention, that convention shall prevail to the extent of the
inconsistency.

3. Articles 9.13 (Expropriation and Compensation) and 9.6 (Performances
requirements) shall apply to taxation measures.

Article 9.17: Denial of Benefits

1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of the other Party
that is an enterprise of the other Party and to its covered investments if persons of a non
- Party own or control the enterprise and the denying Party’:

(a) does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non - Party; or

adopts or maintains measures with respect to the non - Party or a person
of the non - Party that prohibit transactions with the enterprise or that
would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were
accorded to the enterprise or to its investments.

For the purpose of this Article, an enterprise is:

(a) “owned” by an investor if more than 50 percent of the equity interest in
it is beneficially owned by the investor; and

(b) “controlled” by an investor if the investor has the power to name a
majority of its directors or otherwise to legally direct its actions.

Article 9.18: General Exceptions

1. Notwithstanding Article 9.5 (Most-Favoured Nation Treatment), nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed so as to oblige a Party to extend to the investors of the
other Party and to their covered investments the benefits of any treatment resulting
from:

7 This Article shall be interpreted in accordance with Annex 9C (Taxation and Expropriation).

8 For greater certainty, the benefits of this Chapter may be denied by a Party, in accordance with this
Article, at any time, including after the institution of arbitration proceedings in accordance with Section
D (Investor — State Dispute Settlement).

(c)

any bilateral or multilateral international agreement for the promotion
and protection of investment which was signed prior to the date of entry
into force of this Agreement;

any existing or future customs union, free trade area agreement,
common market, economic union or similar international agreement, to
which either Party is a party or may become a party, within the meaning
of "customs union" or "free trade area" in accordance with Article XXIV
of the GATT 1994 and Article V of the GATS; or

any existing or future bilateral or multilateral agreement concerning
intellectual property.

2. Subject to the requirements that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or
unjustifiable manner, and do not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade
or investment, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from
adopting, maintaining, enforcing measures including environmental measures, that it
considers necessary:

(a)
(b)

to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

to protect public morals or to maintain public order, provided that the
measure may only be invoked where a genuine and sufficiently serious
threat is posed to one of the fundamental interests of society;

to ensure safety;

to protect national treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological value;
to conserve living or non-living exhaustible natural resources, provided
that such measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions

on domestic production or consumption; or

to secure compliance with the legislation which are not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Chapter including those relating to:

(1) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal
with the effects of a default on contract; and

(11) — the protection of the privacy of the individual in relation to the
processing and dissemination of personal data and the protection of
confidentiality of personal records and accounts.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining
reasonable measures for prudential reasons, including:

the protection of investors, depositors, policy holders, policy claimants,
as well as financial market participants, or persons to whom a fiduciary
duty is owed by a financial institution;

the maintenance of the safety, soundness, integrity or financial
responsibility of financial institutions; and

(c) ensuring the integrity and stability of the Party’s financial system.

Such measures shall be taken in good faith and shall not be used as means of
avoiding a Party’s commitments or obligations under this Agreement.

Section D: Investor — State Dispute Settlement

Article 9.19: Consultation and Negotiation

l. In the event of an investment dispute, the claimant and the respondent should
initially seek to resolve the dispute through consultation and negotiation, which may
include the use of non-binding, third-party procedures.

2. The claimant shall deliver to the respondent a written request for consultations
setting out the following:

(a) the name and address of the claimant and its covered investment;

(b) the nature of the claim, including the measure or measures alleged to
breach the provisions of this Chapter, and a brief description of facts
regarding said measure or measures;

the relief sought and the initial assessment of amount of damages
claimed; and

indication and supporting documents that the claimant is an investor of
the other Party and that it owns or controls the covered investment with
respect to which a request for consultations was submitted.

3. For greater certainty, the initiation of consultations and negotiations shall not
be construed as recognition of the jurisdiction of a tribunal.

Article 9.20: Submission of Claim to Arbitration

1. In the event that an investment dispute cannot be settled by consultation and
negotiation according to Article 9.19 (Consultation and Negotiation) within six months
from the date on which the claimant requested in writing the respondent for consultation
and negotiation, the claimant may, only on its own behalf, submit to arbitration under
this Article, a claim that:

(a) the respondent has breached an obligation under:
i. Section C (Investment Promotion and Protection); or
ii. Articles 9.4 (National Treatment), 9.5 (Most-Favoured Nation
Treatment), 9.7 (Senior Management and Board of Directors) and

9.6 (Performance Requirement) with regard to management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of investments, and

(b) the claimant has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of,
that breach.

2. For greater certainty, a claimant may only submit a claim with regards to an
investment as defined in Article 9.1 (Definitions).

3. The extent of the claim referred to in paragraph 1 shall not exceed the monetary
value of the loss or damage caused to the investor as a result of the breach mentioned
in paragraph 1.

4. At least 90 days before submitting any claim to arbitration under this Section, a
claimant shall deliver to the respondent a written notice of its intention to submit the
claim to arbitration (notice of intent). The notice shall specify:

(a) the name and address of the claimant and its covered investment;

(b) for each claim, the provision of Section C (Investment Promotion and
Protection) alleged to have been breached and any other relevant
provisions;
the legal and factual basis for each claim;
the relief sought and the approximate amount of damages claimed; and
indication and supporting documents establishing that the claimant is an
investor of the other Party and that it owns or controls the covered

investment in respect of which a request for consultations was
submitted.

5. Provided that six months have elapsed since the claimant requested in writing
the respondent for consultation and negotiation, the claimant may submit a claim
referred to in paragraph 2 to arbitration:

(a) under the ICSID Convention, provided that both Parties are parties to
the ICSID Convention;

under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that either Party,
but not both, is a party to the ICSID Convention;

(c) under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; or

(d) if the disputing parties agree, under any other arbitration institution or
arbitration rules.

The claimant shall provide with the notice of arbitration:

(a) the name of the arbitrator that the claimant appoints; or

(b) the claimant’s written consent for the Secretary-General to appoint that
arbitrator.

7. A claim shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under this Article when the
claimant’s notice of or request for arbitration:

(a) referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention is
received by the Secretary-General of ICSID;

(b) referred to in Article 2 of Schedule C of the ICSID Additional Facility
Rules is received by the Secretary-General of ICSID;

(c) referred to in Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, together
with the statement of claim referred to in Article 20 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, are received by the respondent; or

under any other arbitration institution or arbitration rules selected under
subparagraph 3(d) is received by the respondent, unless otherwise
specified by such institution or in such rules.

A claim asserted by the claimant for the first time after such notice of arbitration

is submitted shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under this Article on the date of
its receipt under the applicable arbitral rules.

Article 9.21: Consent of Each Party to Arbitration

1. Each Party hereby consents to the submission of a claim to arbitration under this
Article in accordance with this Chapter.

2. The claimant shall deliver its consent in accordance with the procedures
provided for in this Section at the time of submitting a claim pursuant to Article 9.20
(Submission of a Claim to Arbitration).

3. The consent under paragraphs 1 and 2 and the submission of a claim to
arbitration under this Article shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of:

(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility
Rules for written consent of the parties; and

(b) Article I of the New York Convention for an agreement in writing.

Article 9.22: Conditions and Limitations on Consent of Each Party

1. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Article if more than three
years have elapsed from the date on which the claimant first acquired, or should have

first acquired, knowledge of the breach alleged under paragraph 1 of Article 9.20
(Submission of Claim to Arbitration) and knowledge that the claimant has incurred loss
or damage.

2. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section unless:

(a) the claimant consents in writing to arbitration in accordance with the
procedures set out in this Article;

the notice of arbitration is accompanied, for claims submitted to
arbitration under Article 9.20 (Submission of Claim to Arbitration), by
the claimant’s written waiver of any right to initiate or continue, before
any administrative tribunal or court under the law of either Party, or
other dispute settlement procedures, including those in other bilateral or
multilateral agreements which both Parties are parties to, any proceeding
with respect to the subject matter of its claim or to any measure alleged
to constitute a breach referred to in Article 9.20 (Submission of Claim
to Arbitration); and

no judgment or award has been delivered on the subject matter of the
dispute with regard to any measure alleged to constitute a breach
referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 9.20 (Submission of Claim to
Arbitration) before any administrative tribunal or court under the law of
either Party, other dispute settlement procedures or under the
mechanisms mentioned in subparagraph (b).

Article 9.23: Selection of Arbitrators

1. Unless the disputing parties otherwise agree, the tribunal shall comprise three
arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each of the disputing parties and the third, who
shall be the presiding arbitrator, appointed by agreement of the disputing parties.

2. The Secretary-General shall serve as appointing authority for an arbitration
under this Section. If the Secretary-General is a national of either Party or a national of
a non-Party that does not maintain diplomatic relations with either Party or otherwise
prevented from discharging the said function, the Deputy Secretary-General shall be
invited to make the appointment.

3. If a tribunal has not been constituted within 90 days of the date a claim is
submitted to arbitration under this Section, the Secretary-General, on the request of a
disputing party, shall appoint, in his or her discretion, the arbitrator or arbitrators not
yet appointed. The Secretary-General shall not appoint a national of either Party as the
presiding arbitrator unless the disputing parties otherwise agree.

4. Arbitrators shall not be nationals of states not having diplomatic relations with
either Party.

Article 9.24: Place of Arbitration
1. The claimant and the respondent may agree on the place of arbitration.

2. If the claimant and the respondent fail to reach an agreement regarding the place
of arbitration, the tribunal shall determine the place of arbitration provided:

(a) that the place shall be in the area of a Party or in the area of a non-Party
that is a party to the New York Convention;

(b) that the determined place of arbitration is in accordance with the
applicable arbitrational rules.

Article 9.25: Places of Hearings and Procedural Language

l. The claimant and the respondent may agree on the place of a hearing, subject to
the applicable arbitration rules.

2. If the claimant and the respondent fail to reach an agreement regarding the place
of a hearing, the tribunal shall determine the place of a hearing, provided:

(a) that the determined place of the hearing is in accordance with the
applicable arbitrational rules;

that the tribunal has taken both disputing parties' interests under
consideration with regard to the financial burden of the arbitration
procedure; and

that if the determined place of the hearing is in the territory of a non-
Party it shall be a non- Party with which both Parties have diplomatic
relations.

3. Unless the claimant and the respondent agree otherwise, the procedural
language of the proceedings shall be English.

4. Any language or languages selected under paragraph 3 shall be made in
accordance with the applicable arbitration rules.

Article 9.26: Conduct of Arbitration

1. In an arbitration procedure under this Section, the respondent shall not assert,
as a defence, counterclaim, right of setoff or otherwise, that the claimant has received
or will receive indemnification or other compensation for all or part of the alleged
damages pursuant to an insurance or guarantee contract.

9-20

2. Unless the disputing parties have agreed to another expedited procedure for
making preliminary objections, the Party which is the party to the dispute may, no later
than 30 days after the constitution of the tribunal, and in any event before the first
session of the tribunal, file an objection that a claim is manifestly without legal merit.
The Party which is the party to the dispute shall specify as precisely as possible the
basis for the objection. The tribunal, after giving the disputing parties the opportunity
to present their observations on the objection, shall, at its first session or promptly
thereafter, notify the disputing parties of its decision on the objection. The decision of
the tribunal shall be without prejudice to the right of the Party which is the party to the
dispute to file an objection to the jurisdiction of the tribunal or to object, in the course
of the proceedings, that a claim lacks legal merit.

3. The tribunal may order security for costs at a proposal of the respondent. The
tribunal shall especially consider ordering security for costs when there is a reason to
believe:

(a) that the claimant will be unable to pay, if ordered to do so, a reasonable
part of attorney fees and other costs to the Party which is the party to the
dispute; or

(b) that the claimant has divested assets to avoid the consequences of the
arbitral proceedings.

Should the claimant fail to pay the security for costs ordered by the tribunal
within the time period set by the tribunal, the tribunal may order the suspension or
termination of the arbitral proceedings.

Article 9.27: Third-Party Funding

1. An investor shall file a written notice to the other disputing party and the arbitral
tribunal disclosing the name and address of any non-party from which the investor,
directly or indirectly, has received funds for the pursuit or defence of the proceeding
through a donation or grant, or in return for remuneration dependent on the outcome of
the proceeding ("third-party funding"). If the non-party providing funding is a juridical
person, the notice shall include the names of the persons and entities that own and
control that juridical person.

2. The investor shall file the notice referred to in paragraph | upon submission of
the request for arbitration, or immediately upon concluding a third-party funding
arrangement after submission. The investor shall immediately notify the arbitral
tribunal and the other disputing party of any changes to the information in the notice.

3. The tribunal may order disclosure of further information regarding the funding
agreement and the non-party providing funding.

9-2]

Article 9.28: Governing Law

1. Subject to paragraph 3, when a claim is submitted under this Section, the
tribunal shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with this Chapter and applicable
rules of international law, and take into consideration, as matter of fact, any relevant
domestic law of the disputing Party.’

2. The tribunal shall not have jurisdiction to determine the legality of a measure,
alleged to constitute a breach of this Chapter, under the domestic law of a Party.

3. In cases where reference to the TRIPS Agreement is made in an arbitration
procedure under this Section, the tribunal shall consider relevant interpretation in
reports of panels and the Appellate Body adopted by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body
regarding substantially equivalent rights or obligations of the Parties under the TRIPS
Agreement, or other multilateral intellectual property treaties.

4. When serious concerns arise as regards issues of interpretation which may affect
matters relating to this Section, the Parties may adopt, at any time, joint interpretations
of provisions of this Agreement. Any such interpretation shall be binding upon the
tribunal.

5. For greater certainty, the tribunal shall be bound by the interpretation given to
the domestic law by the courts or authorities which are competent to interpret the
relevant domestic law, and any meaning given to the relevant domestic law made by
the tribunal shall not be binding upon the courts and the authorities of either Party..

Article 9.29: Awards

1. Where a tribunal makes a final award against a respondent, the tribunal may
award:

(a) monetary damages and applicable interest;

restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that the
respondent may pay monetary damages and any applicable interest, in
lieu of restitution; or

(c) both.

2. A tribunal may also award costs and attorney’s fees in accordance with this
Section and the applicable arbitration rules. At the request of the respondent, the award
will specify the account for transfer of money or the person to whom restitution should
be made.

’ For greater certainty, a Party may not invoke the provisions of its domestic law as a justification for its
failure to perform this Chapter.

9-22

3. Without prejudice to paragraph 2 and to the claimant's right to claim that they
are not adequately compensated, the monetary value of the award made under
paragraph | shall not be greater than the loss suffered by the investor as a result of the
breach determined by the tribunal, reduced by any prior damages or compensation
already provided in relation to the same factual dispute. For the calculation of monetary
damages, the tribunal shall take into account any restitution of property or repeal or
modification of the measure, or other mitigating factors.

4. A tribunal may not award punitive damages.

5. An award made by a tribunal shall have no binding force except between the
disputing parties and in respect of the particular case.

6. Subject to the applicable arbitration rules and the applicable review procedure
for an interim award, a disputing party shall abide by and comply with an award without
delay.

7. Each Party shall provide for the enforcement of an award in its territory.

8. A disputing party may seek enforcement of an arbitration award under the
ICSID Convention or the New York Convention.

9-23

Section E: Final Provisions

Article 9.30: Duration and Termination

In respect of investments made while this Agreement is 1n force, the provisions
of Sections A (General Provisions), C (Investment Promotion and Protection) and D
(Investor-State Dispute Settlement) of this Chapter and relevant provisions of Chapter
1 (Initial Provisions and General Definitions) and Chapter 11 (Exceptions) shall
continue in effect with respect to such investments for a period of ten years after the
date of termination of this Agreement unless otherwise agreed by the Parties thereafter.

9-24

CHAPTER 10
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
Article 10.1: Cooperation
1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation in the field of government
procurement in accordance with their respective laws and regulations and given the available

resources.

2. The Parties shall cooperate for the purposes of improving transparency, promoting fair
competition and the use of electronic technologies in the field of government procurement.

3. Each Party shall inform the other Party as soon as possible of any significant modification
of its laws, regulations and procedures relating to government procurement.

4. The cooperation activities shall include the exchange of, where appropriate, non-
confidential information, consultations, as provided for in Article 10.3 (Consultations), and
technical assistance.

The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in the following activities:

a) exchanging experience and information, such as regulatory frameworks, best
practices and statistics;

b) developing and expanding the use of electronic means in government
procurement;

Cc) capacity building for government officials in best government procurement
practices;

d) strengthening the institutional framework for the fulfilment of this Chapter; and
e) enhancing the ability to provide multilingual access to procurement opportunities.
6. The Parties shall develop further cooperation activities such as holding seminars for

suppliers to inform them of each Party’s laws, regulations and procedures relating to government
procurement.

7. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in order to promote and facilitate the
participation of goods suppliers and service providers from the Parties in government
procurement tenders of the Parties, in particular in the following areas:

medical equipment;
pharmaceutical products;
agriculture technologies;

water technologies;

10-1

(e) software; and

(f) information technology.

Article 10.2: Information on the Procurement System

1. For purposes of transparency, each Party shall make its laws and regulations relating to
government procurement publicly available.

2. The Parties shall exchange the lists of media resources in which the Parties publish
relevant information on government procurement.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to establish and maintain electronic means for publishing its
laws and regulations and information on government procurement, given available resources.

4. Each Party may expand the content of government procurement information and the
scope of the services provided through electronic means.
Article 10. 3: Consultations

1. On request of a Party, the other Party shall provide responses on the issues related to
government procurement within a reasonable period of time.

2. In the event of any disagreement relating to the application of this Chapter, the Parties
shall make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory resolution through consultations.

3. Each Party shall accord positive consideration to, and afford adequate opportunity for,
consultations regarding the implementation of this Chapter.

4. A request for such consultations shall be submitted to the other Party’s Contact Point
established under Article 10.5 (Contact Points). Unless the Parties agree otherwise, they shall
hold consultations within 60 days of the date of receipt of the request.

5. Consultations may be conducted in the form of a meeting or by other means agreed by
the Parties.

Article 10.4: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Any matter arising under this Chapter shall not be subject to the dispute settlement mechanism
provided for in Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of this Agreement.

Article 10.5: Contact Points

10-2

1. Each Party shall designate a Contact Point to monitor the implementation of this Chapter.
The Contact Points listed in Annex 10A shall work collaboratively to facilitate the
implementation of this Chapter.

2. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party of any change to its Contact Point.

Article 10.6: Review

Within three years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall
review this Chapter within the framework of the Joint Committee, and, subject to a decision by
the Joint Committee, enter into negotiations with a view to providing each other with access to
their respective government procurement markets on a reciprocal basis.

10-3

CHAPTER 11
EXCEPTIONS

Article 11.1: General Exceptions

1. For the purposes of Chapter 2 (Trade in Goods), Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin), Chapter 4
(Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation), Chapter 5 (Trade Remedies), Chapter 6 (Sanitary
and Phytosanitary Measures), and Chapter 7 (Technical Barriers to Trade), Article XX of GATT
1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis.

2. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XX(b) of GATT 1994
include environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal, or plant life or health, and
that Article XX(g) of GATT 1994 applies to measures relating to the conservation of living and
non-living exhaustible natural resources.

3. For the purposes of Chapters 8 (Cross-Border Trade in Services) and 9 (Investment),
Article XIV of GATS (including its footnotes) is incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

4. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XIV(b) of GATS include
environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal, or plant life or health. The Parties
understand that the measures referred to in Article XIV(a) of GATS include measures aimed at
maintaining internal public order.

Article 11.2: Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:

(a) require a Party to furnish or allow access to any information the disclosure of
which it determines to be contrary to its essential security interests; or

preclude a Party from applying measures that it considers necessary for the
fulfilment of its obligations with respect to the maintenance or restoration of
international peace or security, or the protection of its own essential security
interests.

Article 11.3: Taxation

l. This Agreement does not apply to taxation measures.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1:

Article 2.3 (National Treatment) and the other provisions of this Agreement
necessary to give effect to that Article shall apply to a taxation measure to the same
extent as does Article HI of the GATT 1994;

Article 8.3 (National Treatment) and the other provisions of this Agreement
necessary to give effect to that Article shall apply to taxation measures to the same
extent as does Article XVII of the GATS; and

(c) Article 8.4 (Most favoured Nation Treatment), shall apply to taxation measures to
the same extent as does Article II of the GATS.

3. This Agreement does not affect the rights and obligations of a Party under a tax convention.
In the event of inconsistency between this Agreement and a tax convention, the tax convention
prevails to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 11.4: Disclosure of Information
1. Each Party shall, in accordance with its domestic laws and regulations, maintain the

confidentiality of information provided in confidence by the other Party pursuant to this
Agreement.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to furnish or allow access

to confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement, or otherwise
be contrary to public interest, or which would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of
individuals or of particular enterprises, public or private.

CHAPTER 12
TRANSPARENCY

Article 12.1: Publication

1.

For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) “measure of general application” includes laws, regulations, procedures and
administrative rulings of general application that may have an impact on any matter

covered by this Agreement; and

(b) “interested person” means any person that may be affected by a measure of general
application.

Each Party shall ensure that measures of general application:
(a) are published promptly via an officially designated medium, including where
possible electronic means, in such a manner as to enable governments and

interested persons to become acquainted with them; and

(b) to the extent required by its law, allow for a sufficient period of time between
publication and entry into force of such measures.

To the extent required by its law, each Party shall:

(a) publish in advance any such measure referred to in paragraph | that it proposes to
adopt; and

(b) provide interested persons and the other Party for a reasonable opportunity to
comment on such proposed measures.

Article 12.2: Provision of Information

Upon request of another Party, each Party shall provide information and respond to
questions pertaining to any measure of general application that the requesting Party considers
might materially affect the operation of this Agreement.

Article 12.3: Administrative Proceedings

In order to ensure that a measure of general application affecting a matter covered by this

Agreement is applied in a consistent, impartial, and reasonable manner, a Party shall ensure that,
in an administrative proceeding involving a specific case, if a measure referred to in Article 12.1
(Publication) is applied to a particular person or good of the other Party:

12-]

whenever possible, a person of the other Party who is directly affected by a
proceeding is given reasonable notice, in accordance with domestic procedures,
when that proceeding is initiated, including a description of the nature of the
proceeding, a statement of the legal authority under which the proceeding is
initiated, and a general description of the issues;

a person referred to in subparagraph (a) is afforded a reasonable opportunity to
present facts and arguments in support of the person’s position prior to a final
administrative action when permitted by time, the nature of the proceeding, and the
public interest; and

the administrative proceeding is conducted in accordance with its law.

12-2

CHAPTER 13
ADMINISTRATION OF THE AGREEMENT
Article 13.1: Establishment of the Joint Committee
1. The Parties hereby establish the Joint Committee.
2. The Joint Committee shall be composed of relevant government officials of each Party
and shall be co-chaired by senior officials of the Parties from ministries primarily responsible
for international trade.

Article 13.2: Procedures of the Joint Committee

1. The Joint Committee shall, normally, convene once every two years or when necessary
upon request in writing of either Party.

2. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, meetings of the Joint Committee shall be held
alternately in each country, or by any technological means available.

3. All decisions of the Joint Committee shall be taken by mutual agreement.

4. The Joint Committee shall adopt its own rules of procedure, as well as its meeting
schedule and the agenda for its meetings.

Article 13.3: Functions of the Joint Committee

l. The Joint Committee shall:

(a) monitor and review the implementation and operation of this Agreement;

(b) supervise and coordinate the work of all bodies established under this
Agreement;

(c) evaluate and adopt decisions as envisaged in this Agreement regarding any
subject matter which is referred to it by any subcommittee, working group and
other bodies established under this Agreement;

establish the amount of remuneration and expenses to be paid to arbitrators
under Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) taking into consideration WTO standards
regarding remuneration;

without prejudice to Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) and other relevant
provisions of this Agreement, seek to prevent and to solve problems which might
arise in areas covered by this Agreement, or resolve disputes that may arise
regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement;

consider any other matters that may affect the operation of this Agreement and
carry out any other functions as the Parties may agree; and

(g) consider ways to further enhance trade and investment relations between the
Parties.

The Joint Committee may:

(a) consider and recommend to the Parties any amendments to this Agreement. If
such amendment is agreed upon by the Parties, it shall enter into force in
accordance with the procedure set forth in Article 15.3 (Entry into Force);

modify by a Joint Committee decision:

(1) the Schedules to Annex 2B (Reduction or Elimination of Customs
Duties), with the purpose of adding one or more goods excluded in the
Tariff Elimination Schedule;

the phase-out periods established in Annex 2B (Reduction or
Elimination of Customs Duties), with the purpose of accelerating the
tariff reduction;

(111) the specific rules of origin established in Annex 3A (Rules of Origin —
Specific Rules of Origin); and

(iv) — the Rules of Procedure for Arbitral Tribunal Proceedings established in
Annex 14-A and the Code of Conduct established in Annex 14-B.

Each Party shall make any modifications referred to in this subparagraph,
subject to the completion of its applicable internal legal procedures and upon
notification of such, within such period as the Parties may agree; and

(c) adopt interpretive decisions concerning this Agreement binding on arbitral
tribunals established under Article 14. 8 (Dispute Settlement — Request for the
Establishment of an Arbitral Tribunal) and tribunals established under Article
9.23 (Selection of Arbitrators).

3. For the purposes of this Article, the Parties shall exchange information upon the request
of either Party.

Article 13.4: Establishment of Subcommittees, Working Groups and Other Bodies:

1. The Parties hereby establish the following subcommittees comprising representatives
from both Parties:

(a) Sub-committee on Trade in Goods;

(b) Sub-committee on Customs and Rules of Origin;

(c) Sub-committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary measures;
(d) Sub-Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade;

2. The Joint Committee may establish subcommittees, working groups, or any other bodies
comprised of appropriate representatives from both Parties and delegate responsibilities to
them in order to assist it in the performance of its tasks. The composition, duties and rules of
procedure of such subcommittees, working groups or other bodies shall be in accordance with
the relevant provisions of this Agreement or determined by the Joint Committee consistent with
this Agreement.

3. The subcommittees, working groups and other bodies shall inform the Joint Committee,
sufficiently in advance, of their schedule of meetings and of the agenda of those meetings. The
subcommittees, working groups and other bodies, shall submit summaries of their meetings to
the Joint Committee.

4. All decisions of the subcommittees, working groups and other bodies shall be taken by
mutual agreement.

Article 13.5: Free Trade Agreement Coordinators

1. Each Party shall appoint a Free Trade Agreement Coordinator and notify the other Party
of the details of such Coordinator within 60 days after the date of entry into force of this
Agreement, as follows:

(a) For Viet Nam, the Multilateral Trade Policy Department, the Ministry of
Industry and Trade, or its successor; and

(b) For Israel, Bilateral Agreements Department, Foreign Trade Administration,
Ministry of Economy and Industry, or its successor.

The Coordinators shall jointly:
(a) develop agendas;
make other preparations for the Joint Committee meetings;
follow-up on the Joint Committee's decisions as appropriate;
act as contact points to facilitate communication between the Parties on any
matter covered by this Agreement, unless otherwise provided for in this

Agreement;

receive any notifications and information submitted under this Agreement,
unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement;

assist the Joint Committee in any other matter referred to them by the Joint
Committee; and

identify, upon request of the other Party, the office or official responsible for the
matter and assist, as necessary, in facilitating communication with the requesting
Party.

CHAPTER 14
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Article 14.1: Objective

1. The objective of this Chapter is to provide an effective and efficient dispute settlement
process between the Parties-for the avoidance and settlement of disputes arising under this
Agreement.

2. The Parties shall endeavour to agree on the interpretation and application of this
Agreement and shall make all efforts through cooperation, and consultations, to arrive at a
mutually satisfactory solution concerning any matter raised under the scope of this Chapter.

Article 14.2: Scope

Except for matters arising under Chapter 10 (Government Procurement), and as
otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply with respect to the avoidance or
settlement of all disputes between the Parties regarding the interpretation or application of this
Agreement wherever a Party considers that:

(a) a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with its obligations under this
Agreement; or

the other Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under this
Agreement; or

a benefit it could reasonably have expected to accrue to it under a provision of
Chapters 2 (Trade in Goods), 3 (Rules of Origin), or 4 (Customs Administration
and Trade Facilitation) is being nullified or impaired as a result of the application
of a measure of the other Party that is not inconsistent with this Agreement,
within the meaning of Article XXIII:1(b) of the GATT 1994.

Article 14.3: Mutually Agreed Solution

The Parties may reach a mutually agreed solution to a dispute under this Chapter at any
time. The Parties shall jointly notify the Joint Committee of any such solution. Upon
notification of the mutually agreed solution, any dispute settlement procedure under this
Chapter shall be terminated.

Article 14.4: Consultations

1. Any dispute with respect to any matter referred to in Article 14.2 (Scope) shall, as far
as possible, be settled by consultations between the Parties.

2. Any request for consultations shall be submitted in writing and shall give the reasons
for the request, including identification of the measures or other matter referred to in Article

14-1

14.2 (Scope), and an indication of the legal basis of the request, including the provisions of the
Agreement considered to be applicable.

3. If a request for consultation is made pursuant to paragraph 2, the Party to which the
request is made shall reply to the request within 15 days after the date of its receipt and shall
enter into consultations within a period of no more than 30 days after the date of receipt of the
request, with a view to reaching a mutually agreed solution.

4. Consultations in cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods shall be
held within 15 days after the date of receipt of the request.

5. Consultations shall take place, unless the Parties agree otherwise, in the territory of the
Party complained against.

6. The Parties shall make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any
matter through consultations. To this end, the Parties shall:

(a) provide sufficient information as may be reasonably available to it to enable a
full examination of how the matter or measure subject to consultation might
affect the operation of the Agreement; and

(b) treat as confidential any information exchanged during the consultations.

Article 14.5: Good Offices, Conciliation or Mediation

1. The Parties may at any stage of any dispute settlement procedure under this Chapter
agree to undertake good offices, conciliation or mediation. Good offices, conciliation or
mediation may begin at any time and be suspended or terminated by either Party at any time.

2. All proceedings and any documents submitted under this Article shall be confidential
and without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further proceedings under this
Agreement or other proceedings.

Article 14.6: Choice of Forum

Disputes regarding any matter covered both by this Agreement and the WTO
Agreement or any other free trade agreement to which both Parties are party may be settled in
either forum selected by the complaining Party. Once dispute settlement procedures are
initiated under Article 14.8 (Request for the Establishment of an Arbitral Tribunal) to this
Agreement or under Article 6 of the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the
Settlement of Disputes contained in Annex 2 to the WTO Agreement or any other free trade
agreement to which both Parties are party, the forum thus selected shall be used to the
exclusion of the other fora.

Article 14.7: Qualification of Arbitrators

1. All arbitrators shall:

14-2

have expertise or experience in law, international trade, other matters covered
by this Agreement, or in settlement of disputes arising under international trade
agreements;

be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity, impartiality, reliability, and sound
judgment;

be independent of, and not be affiliated with or take instructions from either
Party;

be nationals of states having diplomatic relations with both Parties; and

(e) comply with the Code of Conduct attached as Annex 14B (Code of Conduct) to
this Agreement.

2. An individual shall not serve as a member of an arbitral tribunal for a dispute in which
that person has participated under Article 14.5 (Good Offices, Conciliation or Mediation).

Article 14.8: Request for the Establishment of an Arbitral Tribunal

1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the complaining Party that requested consultations
under Article 14.4 (Consultations) may request the establishment of an arbitral tribunal if the
Parties failed to resolve the matter:

(a) within 60 days of the date of receipt of the request for consultations; or

(b) within 25 days of the date of receipt of the request for consultations for matters
referred to in Article 14.4(4).

2. Requests for the establishment of an arbitral tribunal shall be made in writing to the
Party complained against. The complaining Party shall identify in its request the specific
measure or other matter at issue, and clearly present the legal basis for the complaint, including
indicating the relevant provisions of this Agreement.

Article 14.9 Terms of Reference of the Arbitral Tribunal

Unless the Parties otherwise agree, within 20 days after the date of receipt of the request
for the establishment of the arbitral tribunal, the terms of reference of the arbitral tribunal shall
be:

“To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the matter
referred to in the request for the establishment of an arbitral tribunal pursuant to Article
14.8(2), and to make findings, determinations and any jointly requested recommendations, as
provided in Article 14.12(4).”

14-3

Article 14.10: Composition of the Arbitral Tribunal
1. The Parties shall apply the following procedures in establishing an arbitral tribunal:

(a) the arbitral tribunal shall comprise three arbitrators, unless the Parties agree
otherwise;

within 30 days after the date of receipt of the request for the establishment of the
arbitral tribunal, each Party shall notify the other Party of its appointment of an
arbitrator and propose up to four candidates, who are not nationals of either Party
and do not have their usual place of residence in either Party, to serve as the
chair of the arbitral tribunal. If a Party fails to appoint an arbitrator within this
time, the arbitrator shall be appointed by the other Party from the candidates
proposed for the chair by the Party that failed to appoint an arbitrator, if such a
list exists or, in the absence of such a list, from the other Party's proposed
candidates.

the Parties shall endeavour to agree on a third arbitrator who shall serve as chair
from among the candidates proposed, within 15 days from the date the second
arbitrator has been appointed or selected. If the Parties fail to decide on a chair
within this time period, within a further seven days, the chair shall be appointed
after selection by lot, from the candidates proposed, in the presence of
representatives of both Parties.

2. The date of establishment of the arbitral tribunal shall be the date upon which the chair
is appointed.

3. In case a Party raises a reasoned objection against an arbitrator regarding his or her
compliance with the Code of Conduct attached as Annex 14B (Code of Conduct), the Parties
shall follow the procedures provided for in rules 18 to 20 of Annex 14A (Rules of Procedure).

4. If an arbitrator appointed by a Party withdraws, is removed or becomes unable to serve,
a replacement shall be appointed by that Party within 30 days and, in cases of urgency, within
15 days, failing which the replacement shall be appointed by the other Party from the
candidates proposed for the chair in accordance with the second sentence of paragraph 1(b).

5. If the chair of the arbitral tribunal withdraws, is removed or becomes unable to serve,
the Parties shall endeavour to decide on the appointment of a replacement within 30 days and,
in cases of urgency, within 15 days, failing which the replacement shall be appointed in
accordance with paragraph I(c).

6. If an appointment in paragraph 4 or paragraph 5 would require selecting from the list
of candidates proposed for chair and there are no remaining candidates, each Party shall
propose up to three additional candidates within 30 days and, within a further seven days the
arbitrator or the chair shall be appointed after selection by lot, from the candidates proposed,
in the presence of representatives of both Parties.

14-4

Article 14.11: Function of Arbitral Tribunals

1. The arbitral tribunal shall make an objective assessment of the matter before it, in
accordance with the request for the establishment of an arbitral tribunal, including an
examination of the facts of the case and their applicability and consistency with this
Agreement. If the arbitral tribunal determines that a measure is inconsistent with a provision
of this Agreement, it shall recommend that the Party complained against bring the measure
into conformity with that provision.

2. The arbitral tribunal shall base its report on the relevant provisions of this Agreement
and on the information provided by the Parties during the proceedings, including submissions,
evidence and arguments made at the hearings.

3. The arbitral tribunal established under this Chapter shall consider the provisions of this
Agreement in accordance with applicable customary rules of interpretation of treaties
including those set forth in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, done at Vienna on
23 May 1969. The report of the arbitral tribunal cannot add to or diminish the rights and
obligations of the Parties provided for in this Agreement.

Article 14.12: Proceedings of Arbitral Tribunals

1. Unless agreed otherwise by the Parties, the arbitral tribunal shall apply the Rules of
Procedure attached as Annex 14A (Rules of Procedure) that shall ensure:

(a) confidentiality of the proceedings and all written submissions to, and
communications with, the arbitral tribunal;

(b) that the deliberations, sessions and meetings of the arbitral tribunal shall be held
in closed sessions;

(c) that the hearings of the arbitral tribunal shall be held in open sessions, unless a
Party requests otherwise;

a right for each Party to at least one hearing before the arbitral tribunal;

(e) an opportunity for each Party to provide initial and rebuttal submissions;

(f) the ability of the arbitral tribunal to seek information, technical advice and expert
opinions; and

(g) the protection of confidential information.

2. An arbitral tribunal shall adopt its decisions by consensus. In the event that an arbitral
tribunal is unable to reach consensus, it shall adopt its decisions by majority vote.

3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the venue for the proceedings shall be at the capital
of the Party complained against.

14-5

4. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the arbitral tribunal shall, within 90 days after the
chair is appointed, present to the Parties an initial report. The report shall include:

(a) findings of fact;
(b) the determination of the arbitral tribunal as to whether:

(1) the measure at issue is inconsistent with obligations in this Agreement;
or

(11) a Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations in this Agreement.

(c) any recommendations other than payment of monetary compensation that the
Parties have jointly requested for the resolution of the dispute; and

(d) the reasons for the findings and determinations.

5. The arbitral tribunal shall allow the Parties 14 days to review the draft of the report
prior to its finalisation and shall include a discussion of any comments by the Parties in its
report.

6. The arbitral tribunal shall present a final report to the Parties within 30 days of the
presentation of the initial report, unless the Parties otherwise agree. When the arbitral tribunal
considers that it cannot issue its report within 120 days after the date of its establishment, it
shall inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the delay and shall indicate the estimated

period of time within which it will issue its report. Under no circumstances shall a report be
issued later than 150 days after the date of establishment of the arbitral tribunal.

7. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods, the arbitral tribunal
shall make every effort to issue its report within 45 days from the date of its establishment.
Under no circumstances shall the report be issued later than 75 days after the establishment of
the arbitral tribunal. The arbitral tribunal shall give a preliminary ruling within 10 days of its
establishment, on whether it deems the case to be urgent.

8. The report shall be final and binding on the Parties. The final report of the arbitral
tribunal shall set out the elements specified in paragraph 4 of this Article.

9. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, the report of the arbitral tribunal may be
published by either Party within 15 days after it is issued to the Parties, subject to the protection
of confidential information.

Article 14.13: Suspension and Termination of Proceedings

1. Where the Parties agree, the Arbitral Tribunal may suspend its work at any time for a
period not exceeding 12 months from the date of such agreement. If the work of the arbitral
tribunal has been suspended for more than 12 months, the authority of the tribunal shall lapse
unless the Parties agree otherwise.

14-6

2. In the event that the Parties reach a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute, the
Parties shall terminate the proceedings of an arbitral tribunal established under this Chapter.

3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, suspension or termination of the proceedings is
without prejudice to the rights of either Party in another proceeding on the same matter under
this Chapter.

4. Before the arbitral tribunal issues its report, it may, at any stage of the proceedings,
propose to the Parties that the dispute be settled amicably.

Article 14.14: Implementation of Report

1. The report of the arbitral tribunal shall be complied with promptly unless the Parties
agree otherwise. If it is impracticable to do so, the Parties shall endeavour to agree on a
reasonable period of time to comply. In the absence of such agreement, within 30 days from
the date of the issuance of the report, either Party may request the original arbitral tribunal to
determine the length of the reasonable period of time, in light of the particular circumstances
of the case. A guideline for the arbitral tribunal shall be that the reasonable time to comply
with the report should not exceed 15 months from the date the report was issued. However, in
exceptional circumstances such reasonable period of time may be longer, but shall not exceed
24 months from the date the report was issued. The ruling of the arbitral tribunal should be
given within 30 days from that request.

2. In case of disagreement as to the existence of a measure complying with the report of
the arbitral tribunal or to the consistency of that measure with the report of the arbitral tribunal,
such dispute shall be decided by the same arbitral tribunal before compensation can be sought
or suspension of benefits can be applied in accordance with Article 14.15 (Compensation and
Suspension of Benefits). In the event the original arbitral tribunal, or any of its members, is
not available, the procedures established in Article 14.10 (Composition of the Arbitral
Tribunal) shall apply. The ruling of the arbitral tribunal shall normally be rendered within 90
days of the request to the original arbitral tribunal or from the date of the appointment of the
last arbitrator in the event that the original arbitral tribunal or any of its members is not
available.

Article 14.15: Compensation and Suspension of Benefits

1. If the Party concerned does not comply with the report within a reasonable period of
time as provided for in Article 14.14(1), or notifies the complaining Party that it does not intend
to do so, or if the arbitral tribunal determines that the responding Party did not comply with
the arbitral tribunal report in accordance with Article 14.14(2), that Party shall, if so requested
by the complaining Party, enter into consultations with a view to agreeing on a mutually
acceptable compensation. If no such agreement has been reached within 20 days from the
request, the complaining Party shall be entitled to suspend the application of benefits granted
under this Agreement but only at a level equivalent to those affected by the measure or matter
that the arbitral tribunal has found to be inconsistent with this Agreement.

2. In considering what benefits to suspend, the complaining Party should first seek to
suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors as that affected by the measure or matter that the

14-7

arbitral tribunal has found to be inconsistent with this Agreement. The complaining Party that
considers it is not practicable or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors may
suspend benefits in other sectors.

3. The complaining Party shall notify the Party complained against of the benefits which
it intends to suspend, the grounds for such suspension and when suspension will commence,
no later than 30 days before the date on which the suspension is due to take effect. Within 20
days from the receipt of such notification, the Party complained against may request the
original arbitral tribunal to rule on whether the benefits which the complaining Party intends
to suspend are at a level equivalent to those affected by the measure found to be inconsistent
with this Agreement, and whether the proposed suspension is in accordance with paragraphs
1 and 2. In the event that the original arbitral tribunal or any of its members is not available,
the procedures established in Article 14.10 (Composition of the Arbitral Tribunal) shall apply.
The ruling of the arbitral tribunal shall be given within 45 days from the receipt of such request.
Benefits shall not be suspended until the arbitral tribunal has issued its ruling.

4. Compensation and suspension of benefits shall be temporary measures and shall only
be applied by the complaining Party until the measure or matter found to be inconsistent with
this Agreement has been withdrawn or amended so as to bring it into conformity with this
Agreement, or until the Parties have resolved the dispute otherwise.

5. At the request of a Party, the original arbitral tribunal shall rule on the conformity with
the final report of any implementing measures adopted after the suspension of benefits and, in
light of such ruling, whether the suspension of benefits should be terminated or modified. In
the event the original arbitral tribunal, or any of its members, is not available, the procedures
established in Article 14.10 (Composition of the Arbitral Tribunal) shall apply. The ruling of
the arbitral tribunal shall be given within 30 days from the date of that request.

Article 14.16: Time Frames

All time frames stipulated in this Chapter may be reduced, waived or extended by
mutual agreement of the Parties.
Article 14.17: Remuneration and Expenses

The remuneration and expenses of the arbitral tribunal shall be borne in equal parts by
the Parties in accordance with Annex 14A (Rules of Procedure). All other expenses not

specified in Annex 14A (Rules of Procedure) shall be borne by the Party incurring those
expenses.

14-8

CHAPTER 15
FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 15.1: Annexes, Appendices and Footnotes

The annexes, appendices and footnotes to this Agreement shall constitute integral parts
of this Agreement.

Article 15.2: Amendments

1. The Parties may agree upon any amendments to this Agreement in writing.

2. Amendments to this Agreement shall enter into force and constitute an integral part of
this Agreement in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 15.3 (Entry into force).

Article 15.3: Entry into Force

This Agreement shall enter into force 60 days after the date of the latter Diplomatic

Note by which the Parties notify each other that their internal legal procedures for the entry into
force of the Agreement have been completed or any other period that the Parties may agree.

Article 15.4: Duration and Termination

This Agreement shall be valid for an indefinite period.

2. Either Party may terminate this Agreement by means of a written Diplomatic Note to
the other Party. Such termination shall become effective six months after the date of receipt of
such notification by the other Party.

Article 15.5: Amendments to the WTO Agreement

If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated into this
Agreement is amended, the Parties shall consult on whether to amend this Agreement in light
of such amendment to the WTO Agreement.