RECOGNISING the strong economic and political ties between the UAE and Viet Nam,
and wishing to strengthen these links through the creation of a free trade area, thus
establishing close and lasting relations;

DETERMINED to build on their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organisation done at Marrakesh on 15 April
1994;

CONSCIOUS of the dynamic and rapidly changing global environment brought about by
globalisation and technological progress that presents various economic and strategic
challenges and opportunities to the Parties;

DETERMINED to develop and strengthen their economic and trade relations taking into
account the different level of economic development and trade balance between the Parties
through the liberalisation and expansion of trade in goods and services in their common
interest and for their mutual benefit;

AIMING to promote transfer of technology and expand trade;

CONVINCED that the establishment of a free trade area will provide a more favourable
climate for the promotion and development of economic and trade relations between the
Parties;

AIMING to facilitate trade by promoting efficient and transparent customs procedures
that reduce costs and ensure predictability for their importers and exporters;

DETERMINED to support the growth and development of micro, small and medium-
sized enterprises by enhancing their ability to participate in, and benefit from, the
opportunities created by this Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (“this
Agreement’’);

AIMING to establish a clear, transparent, and predictable legal and commercial
framework for business planning, that supports further expansion of trade and investment;

HAVE AGREED, in pursuit of the above:

CHAPTER 1
INITIAL PROVISIONS AND GENERAL DEFINITIONS

Article 1.1: Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties, consistent with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and Article V of the GATS,
hereby establish a free trade area.

Article 1.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Agreement are to liberalise and facilitate trade and investment,
promote opportunities for market access, and deepen economic cooperation between the
Parties in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.

Article 1.3: General Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement:

Agreement on Agriculture means the Agreement on Agriculture in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement;

Anti-Dumping Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

Days means calendar days, including weekends and holidays;

DSU means the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes
in Annex 2 to the WTO Agreement;

GATS means the General Agreement on Trade in Services in Annex 1B to the WTO
Agreement;

GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the
WTO Agreement;

GPA means the Agreement on Government Procurement in Annex 4 to the WTO
Agreement;

Harmonised System or HS means the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding
System, including its General Rules for the Interpretation, Section Notes, Chapter Notes

1-1

and Subheading Notes;

Import Licensing Agreement means the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures in
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

Joint Committee means the Joint Committee established pursuant to Article 15.1 (Joint
Committee);

Measure means any measure, whether in form of a law, regulation, rule, procedure,
decision, administrative action, or any other form;

Safeguards Agreement means the Agreement on Safeguards in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement;

SCM Agreement means the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures in
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

TBT Agreement means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade in Annex 1A to the
WTO Agreement;

Territory! means:

(a) For the UAE, its land territories, internal waters, territorial sea, including, the
seabed, and subsoil thereof, and airspace over such territories and waters, as
well as the contiguous zone, the continental shelf and exclusive economic
zone, over which UAE has sovereignty, sovereign rights or jurisdiction as
defined in its laws, and in accordance with international law.

(b) For Viet Nam, its land territory, islands, internal waters, territorial sea and the
airspace over them, the maritime zones beyond its territorial sea, including the
seabed and subsoil thereof, over which the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
exercises sovereignty, sovereign rights and jurisdiction in accordance with
national legislation and international law.

TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement;

WTO means the World Trade Organisation; and

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organisation, done at Marrakesh, 15 April 1994.

' For greater certainty, this Agreement also applies to free zones and export processing zones established
under the laws of each Party, within its territory as defined herein.

1-2

Article 1.4: Relation to Other Agreements

1.

The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other under
the WTO Agreement and other agreements to which both Parties are party.

. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, in the event of any inconsistency

between this Agreement and other agreements to which both Parties are party, the
Parties shall immediately consult with each other with a view to finding a mutually
satisfactory solution.

Article 1.5: Extent of Obligations

Each Party shall take such reasonable measures as may be available to it to ensure
observance of the provisions of this Agreement by the regional and local governments and
authorities within its territories.

Article 1.6: Transparency

1.

Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations, publish or otherwise make
publicly available their laws, regulations, as well as their respective international
agreements which may affect the operation of this Agreement.

. Without prejudice to Article 1.7 (Disclosure of Information), a Party shall respond

within a reasonable period of time to specific questions and provide, upon request,
information to the other Party on matters referred to in paragraph 1.

Article 1.7: Disclosure of Information

. Each Party shall, in accordance with its domestic laws and regulations, maintain the

confidentiality of information designated as confidential by the other Party, provided in
confidence by the other Party pursuant to this Agreement.

. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to furnish or allow

access to confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law
enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or which would prejudice
the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.

CHAPTER 2
TRADE IN GOODS

Article 2.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

Customs duty means any duty or charge of any kind imposed in connection with the
importation of a product, including any form of surtax or surcharge in connection with
such importation, but does not include any:

(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed in conformity with Article III
of the GATT 1994;

(b) anti-dumping or countervailing duty that is applied consistently with the
provisions of Article VI of the GATT 1994, the Anti-Dumping Agreement,
and the SCM Agreement; or

(c) fee or other charge in connection with importation commensurate with the
cost of services rendered and which does not represent a direct or indirect
protection for domestic goods or a taxation of imports for fiscal purposes.

Import licensing means an administrative procedure requiring the submission of an
application or other documentation (other than that generally required for customs
clearance purposes) to the relevant administrative body as a prior condition for importation
into the territory of the importing Party.

Article 2.2: Scope and Coverage

Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this Chapter applies to trade in goods
between the Parties.

Article 2.3: National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation

The Parties shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in accordance
with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. To this end, Article
III of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and made part of
this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 2.4: Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties

1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, including as explicitly set out in
each Party’s Schedule included in Annex 2A (Schedules of Tariff Commitments),

2-1

neither Party shall increase any existing customs duty, nor adopt any new customs
duty, on an originating good of the other Party.

Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the UAE shall eliminate or reduce its
customs duties on goods originating from Viet Nam in accordance with Appendix 2A-
a (Tariff Schedule of the UAE) and Viet Nam shall eliminate or reduce its customs
duties applied on goods originating from the UAE in accordance with Appendix 2A-b
(Tariff Schedule of Viet Nam).

Where a Party reduces its most-favoured-nation applied rate of customs duty, that duty
rate shall apply to an originating good of the other Party if, and for as long as, it is
lower than the customs duty rate on the same good calculated in accordance with
Appendix 2A-a (Tariff Schedule of the UAE) in the case of the UAE or Appendix 2A-
b (Tariff Schedule of Viet Nam) in the case of Viet Nam.

Article 2.5: Acceleration or Improvement of Tariff Commitments

1.

Upon request of a Party, the other Party shall consult with the requesting Party to
consider accelerating or improving, the scope of the elimination of customs duties as
set out in its Schedule included in Annex 2A (Schedules of Tariff Commitments).

Further commitments between the Parties to accelerate or improve the scope of the
elimination of a customs duty on a good (or to include a good in Annex 2A (Schedules
of Tariff Commitments) shall supersede any duty rate or staging category determined
pursuant to their respective Schedules for that good. Such amendment shall come into
effect in accordance with Article 18.2 (Amendments) of this Agreement.

Nothing in this Agreement shall prohibit a Party from unilaterally accelerating or
improving the scope of the elimination of customs duties set out in its Schedule to
Annex 2A (Schedules of Tariff Commitments) on originating goods. When a Party
considers such acceleration or improvement, it shall inform the other Party as early as
possible before the new rate of customs duty takes effect. Any such unilateral
acceleration or improvement of the scope of the elimination of customs duties will not
permanently supersede any duty rate or staging category determined pursuant to its
respective Schedule nor serve to waive that Party’s right to raise the customs duty back
to the level established in its Schedule to Annex 2A (Schedules of Tariff
Commitments) following a unilateral reduction.

Article 2.6: Classification of Goods and Transposition of Schedules

1.

The classification of goods in trade between the Parties shall be in accordance with

each Party’s respective tariff nomenclature in conformity with the Harmonised System
(HS).

The Parties shall ensure that the transposition of the Harmonised System shall not
affect the value of tariff concessions set out in the Schedules of Tariff Commitments

2-2

in Appendices 2A-a (Tariff Schedule of the UAE) and 2A-b (Tariff Schedule of Viet
Nam).

The Parties shall discuss whether any revisions are necessary to implement
Appendices 2A-a (Tariff Schedule of the UAE) and 2A-b (Tariff Schedule of Viet
Nam) due to periodic amendments and transposition of the Harmonised System in
accordance with the methodologies and procedures adopted by the Subcommittee on
Trade in Goods.

Article 2.7: Import and Export Restrictions

1.

Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, a Party shall not adopt or maintain
any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any good of the other Party or on
the exportation or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of the other
Party, in accordance with Article XI of the GATT 1994, including its Notes and
Supplementary Provisions. To that end, Article XI of the GATT 1994, including its
Notes and Supplementary Provisions, are incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Paragraph | shall prohibit a Party from adopting or maintaining:

(a) import licensing conditioned on the fulfilment of a performance
requirement; or

(b) voluntary export restraints.

Paragraphs 1| and 2 shall not apply to the goods listed in Annex 2B (Goods to Which
Viet Nam May Apply Specific Measures). Any amendment to Viet Nam’s laws and
regulations that reduces the scope of the goods listed in Annex 2B (Goods to Which
Viet Nam May Apply Specific Measures) shall automatically apply under this
Agreement. Any preference accorded by Viet Nam regarding the scope of the goods
listed in Annex 2B (Goods to Which Viet Nam May Apply Specific Measures) to any
other trading partner shall automatically apply under this Agreement. Viet Nam shall
notify the UAE of any amendment or preference referred to in this paragraph.

When a Party adopts or maintains an import or export prohibition or restriction it shall
ensure full transparency thereof.

2-3

Article 2.8: Import Licensing

1. No Party shall adopt or maintain a measure that is inconsistent with the Import
Licensing Agreement', which is hereby incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. Before applying any new or modified import licensing procedure, a Party shall publish
it in such a manner as to enable governments and traders to become acquainted with
it, including through publication on an official government internet site. To the extent
possible, that Party shall do so at least 20 days before the new procedure or
modification takes effect. Upon request of the other Party, that Party shall exchange
information concerning its implementation in a reasonable period.

3. Within 30 days after this Agreement enters into force, each Party shall notify the other
Party of its existing import licensing procedures, if any. The notification shall include
the information specified in Article 5.2 of the Import Licensing Agreement.

4. A Party shall be deemed to comply with the above paragraph if it has notified the
WTO Committee on Import Licensing together with the information specified in
Article 5.2 of the Import Licensing Agreement.

Article 2.9: Customs Valuation

The Parties shall determine the customs value of goods traded between them in
accordance with the provisions of Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the Customs
Valuation Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 2.10: Export Subsidies

Upon entry into force of this Agreement, neither Party shall adopt nor maintain any export
subsidy on any good destined for the territory of the other Party in accordance with the
SCM Agreement and the Agreement on Agriculture.

Article 2.11: Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments

1. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the imposition of restrictive measures for
balance-of-payments purposes.

2. Any such measures taken for trade in goods shall be in accordance with Article XII of
the GATT 1994 and the Understanding on the Balance-of-Payments Provisions of the

For the purposes of paragraph | and for greater certainty, in determining whether a measure is inconsistent
with the Import Licensing Agreement, the Parties shall apply the definition of “import licensing” contained
in that Agreement.

2-4

GATT 1994, the provisions of which are incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 2.12: Administrative Fees and Formalities

1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VHI:1 of the GATT 1994 and its
interpretive notes, that all fees and charges of whatever character (other than import
and export duties, charges equivalent to an internal tax or other internal charges
applied consistently with Article HI:2 of the GATT 1994, and anti-dumping and
countervailing duties) imposed on, or in connection with, importation or exportation
of goods are limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered, which
shall not be calculated on an ad valorem basis, and shall not represent an indirect
protection to domestic goods or a taxation of imports or exports for fiscal purposes.

2. Each Party shall promptly publish details and shall make such information available
on the internet regarding the fees and charges it imposes in connection with
importation or exportation.

Article 2.13: Non-Tariff Measures

1. Neither Party shall adopt nor maintain any non-tariff measure on the importation of
any good of the other Party or on the exportation of any good destined for the territory
of the other Party, except in accordance with its WTO rights and obligations or with
this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative
rulings relating to non-tariff measures are not prepared, adopted or applied with the
view to, or with the effect of, creating unnecessary obstacles to trade with the other
Party.

3. If a Party considers that a non-tariff measure of the other Party is creating an
unnecessary obstacle to trade, that Party may nominate such non-tariff measure for
review by the Subcommittee on Trade in Goods by notifying through a written request,
which shall be submitted before the date of the next scheduled meeting of the
Subcommittee on Trade in Goods. A nomination of a non-tariff measure for review
shall include reasons for its nomination, how the measure adversely affects trade
between the Parties, and if possible, suggested solutions. The Subcommittee on Trade
in Goods shall immediately review the measure with a view to securing a mutually
agreed solution to the matter. Review by the Subcommittee on Trade in Goods is
without prejudice to the Parties’ rights under Chapter 17 (Dispute Settlement).

Article 2.14: State Trading Enterprises
The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations under Article XVII of the GATT

1994, including its notes and supplementary provisions and obligations and the WTO

2-5

understanding on the interpretation of Article XVII of the GATT 1994, which are
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 2.15: Temporary Admission of Goods
1. Each Party shall, in accordance with its respective domestic laws and regulations,
grant temporary admission free of customs duties for the following goods imported
from the other Party, regardless of their origin:
(a) professional and scientific equipment, including their spare parts, and
including equipment for the press or television, software, and broadcasting and
cinematographic equipment, that are necessary for carrying out the business
activity, trade, or profession of a person who qualifies for temporary entry pursuant

to the laws of the importing Party;

(b) goods intended for display, demonstration or use at theatres, exhibitions,
fairs, or other similar events;

(c) commercial samples and advertising films and recordings;
(d) goods admitted for sports purposes;

(e) containers and pallets that are used for the transportation of equipment or
used for refilling; and

(f) goods entered for completion or processing’.

2. Each Party shall, at the request of the importer and for reasons deemed valid by its
Customs Authority, extend the time limit for temporary admission beyond the period
initially fixed.

3. Neither Party shall condition the temporary admission of a good referred to in
paragraph 1, other than to require that the good:

(a) not be sold or leased while in its territory;
(b) be accompanied by a security in an amount no greater than the custom
duties and any other tax imposed on imports that would otherwise be owed

on entry or final importation, releasable on exportation of the good;

(c) be capable of identification when exported;

? Processing shall be regulated in accordance with each Party’s domestic laws.

2-6

(d) be exported in accordance with the time period granted for temporary
admission in accordance with its domestic law related to the purpose of the
temporary admission;

(e) not be admitted in a quantity greater than is reasonable for its intended use;
or
(f) be otherwise admissible into the importing Party’s territory under its laws

and regulations.

If any condition that a Party imposes under paragraph 3 has not been fulfilled, that
Party may apply the customs duty, and any other tax or charge that would normally
be owed on the importation of the good and any other charges or penalties provided
for under its laws and regulations.

Each Party through its Customs Authority shall adopt and maintain procedures
providing for the expeditious release of goods admitted under this Article. To the
extent possible, such procedures shall provide that when a good accompanies a
national or resident of the other Party who is seeking temporary entry, the good shall
be released simultaneously with the entry of that national or resident.

Each Party shall permit a good temporarily admitted under this Article to be exported
through a customs port other than that through which it was admitted in accordance
with its customs procedures.

Each Party shall provide that the importer of a good admitted under this Article shall
not be liable for failure to export the good on presentation of satisfactory proof to the
importing Party that the good has been destroyed within the original period fixed for
temporary admission or any lawful extension. A Party may condition relief of liability
under this paragraph by requiring the importer to receive prior approval from the
Customs Authority of the importing Party before the good can be so destroyed.

Article 2.16: Goods Re-Entered After Repair or Alteration

1.

Neither Party shall apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, that re-
enters its territory in accordance with its laws, regulations and procedures after that
good has been temporarily exported from its territory to the territory of the other Party
for repair or alteration, regardless of whether such repair or alteration could be
performed in the territory from which the good was exported, except that a customs
duty or other taxes may be applied to the addition resulting from the repair or alteration
that was performed in the territory of the other Party.

Neither Party shall apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, imported
temporarily from the territory of the other Party for repair or alteration.

2-7

3. For the purposes of this Article, “repair” or “alteration” does not include an operation
or process that:

(a) destroys a good’s essential characteristics or creates a new or commercially

different good;

(b) transforms an unfinished good into a finished good; or

(c) results in a change of the classification at a six-digit level of the Harmonised
System (HS).

Article 2.17: Duty-Free Entry of Commercial Samples of Negligible Value and
Printed Advertising Materials

Each Party, in accordance with its respective domestic laws and regulations, shall grant
duty-free entry to commercial samples of negligible value, and to printed advertising
materials, imported from the territory of the other Party, regardless of their origin, but may
require that:

(a) such samples be imported solely for the solicitation of orders for goods or
services provided from the territory of the other Party or a non-party; or

(b) such advertising materials be imported in packets, that each contain no
more than one copy of each such material, and that neither the materials nor
the packets form part of a larger consignment.

Article 2.18: Subcommittee on Trade in Goods

1. The Parties hereby establish a Subcommittee on Trade in Goods under the Joint
Committee comprising representatives of each Party.

2. The Subcommittee shall meet once a year or meet upon request of either Party to
consider any matter arising under this Chapter. The Parties shall agree on the time,
venue and means of the meetings. The Subcommittee may carry out its work through
whatever means that are appropriate, which may include electronic mail,
videoconferencing, or other means.

3. The functions of the Subcommittee shall include, inter alia:

(a) monitoring and reviewing the implementation and administration of this
Chapter, including any matter related to its implementation, and making
reports and recommendations, if appropriate;

(b) promoting trade in goods between the Parties, including through

consultations on accelerating or improving the scope of preferential

2-8

(c)

(d)

(f)

(g)

(h)

treatment or tariff elimination under this Agreement and other issues, as
appropriate;

addressing barriers to trade in goods between the Parties including those
related to the application of non-tariff measures which may restrict trade
in goods between the Parties and, if appropriate, referring such matters to
the Joint Committee for its consideration;

providing advice and recommendations to the Joint Committee on
cooperation needs regarding trade in goods matters;

reviewing amendments to the Harmonised System (HS) to ensure that
each Party’s obligations under this Agreement are not altered, and
consulting to resolve any conflicts between such amendments to the
Harmonised System (HS), Annex 2A (Schedules of Tariff Commitments),
and national nomenclatures;

consulting on and endeavouring to resolve any difference that may arise
among the Parties on matters related to the classification of goods under
the Harmonised System (HS), including adoption and review of
transposition methodologies and guidelines;

reviewing data on trade in goods in relation to the implementation of this
Chapter;

assessing matters that relate to trade in goods and undertaking any
additional work that the Joint Committee may assign to it.

CHAPTER 3
RULES OF ORIGIN

Article 3.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

Aquaculture refers to the farming of aquatic organisms including fish, molluscs,
crustaceans, other aquatic invertebrates and aquatic plants, from seedstock such as
eggs, fry, fingerlings and larvae, by intervention in the rearing or growth processes to
enhance production, such as, inter alia, regular stocking, feeding, protection from
predators;

Change in tariff classification means a change at the two-digit, four-digit, or six-digit
level of the Harmonised System;

Competent authority refers to:

(a) for Viet Nam, the Ministry of Industry and Trade or any other agency
notified or designated by the Ministry of Industry and Trade from time
to time; and

(b) for the UAE, the Ministry of Economy or any other agency notified or
designated by the Ministry of Economy from time to time;

Consignment means products which are either sent simultaneously from one exporter
to one consignee or covered by a single transport document covering their shipment
from the exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such document, by a single
invoice;

Customs authority refers to:

(a) for Viet Nam, the General Department of Viet Nam Customs under the
Ministry of Finance; and

(b) for the UAE, the Federal Authority for Identity, Citizenship, Customs
and Port Security;

Customs value refers to the value as determined in accordance with Customs
Valuation Agreement;

Exporter means a person, located in the exporting Party, that is exporting the goods
to the other Party and is able to prove the origin of the exported goods, whether or not
that person is the manufacturer or carries out the export formalities;

Fungible materials refers to goods or materials that are of the same kind and
commercial quality, with the same technical and physical characteristics, and which

3-1

cannot be distinguished from one another once they are incorporated into the finished
product;

Generally accepted accounting principles refers to the recognised consensus or
substantial authoritative support in the territory of a Party, with respect to the
recording of revenues, expenses, costs, assets, and liabilities, the disclosure of
information and the preparation of financial statements. These standards may
encompass broad guidelines of general application as well as detailed standards,
practices and procedures;

Good refers to any article of trade including materials and products;

Manufacture refers to any kind of working or processing, including assembly or
specific operations;

Material refers to any ingredient, raw material, compound or part used in the
production of a good;

Non-originating goods or non-originating materials refers to goods or materials that
do not qualify as originating in accordance with this Chapter;

Originating goods or originating materials refers to goods or materials that qualify
as originating in accordance with this Chapter;

Product refers to that which is obtained by growing, raising, mining, harvesting,
fishing, aquaculture, trapping, hunting, extracting or manufacturing, even if it is
intended for later use in another manufacturing operation; and

Production refers to methods of obtaining products, including growing, raising,
mining, harvesting, fishing, aquaculture, trapping, hunting, manufacturing, processing,
assembling.

SECTION A: ORIGIN DETERMINATION

Article 3.2: Originating Goods

1. For the purposes of implementing this Agreement, goods shall be deemed to be
originating in the territory of a Party, if:

(a) the goods are wholly obtained in the territory of that Party in accordance
with Article 3.3 (Wholly Obtained Goods); or

(b) goods are not wholly obtained in the territory of that Party, provided
that the goods have undergone sufficient working or processing there in
accordance with Article 3.4 (Sufficient Working or Processing); or

(c) goods produced in the territory of that Party exclusively from
originating materials.

3-2

2. In each case provided for in paragraph 1, the goods shall be deemed to have
satisfied all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

Article 3.3: Wholly Obtained Goods

For the purposes of subparagraph l(a) of Article 3.2 (Originating Goods), the
following goods shall be deemed to be wholly obtained or produced in the territory

of a Party:

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(1)

Q)

(k)

plants and plant products grown, collected or harvested there;
live animals born or raised there;
products obtained from animals alive there;

mineral products or natural resources extracted or taken from that
Party’s soil, subsoil, waters, seabed or beneath the seabed;

products obtained by hunting, trapping, collecting, capturing, fishing
or aquaculture conducted there;

products of sea fishing and other marine products taken from outside
the territorial waters of the Parties by a vessel registered, recorded,
listed or licensed with a Party and flying its flag;

products made on board a factory ship registered, recorded, listed or
licensed with a Party and flying its flag, exclusively from products
referred to in subparagraph (h);

products, other than products of sea fishing and other marine
products, taken or extracted from the seabed, ocean floor or the
subsoil of the continental shelf or the exclusive economic zone of any
of the Parties, by a Party or a person of a Party provided that that Party
or that person of a Party has the right to exploit such seabed, ocean
floor, or subsoil in accordance with international law;

used goods collected there, provided that such goods are fit only for
the recovery of raw materials;

wastes or scraps resulting from utilisation, consumption or
manufacturing operations conducted there; and

products produced or obtained there exclusively from products

referred to in subparagraphs (a) through (4), or from their derivatives,
at any stage of production.

3-3

Article 3.4: Sufficient Working or Processing

1. For the purposes of subparagraph 1(b) of Article 3.2 (Originating Goods), a good
shall be considered to have undergone sufficient working or processing and shall
deemed to be originating in the territory of a Party when the good satisfies any of
the following:

(a) aChange in Tariff Heading (CTH), which means that all non originating
materials used in the production of the good have undergone a change
in HS tariff classification at the 4-digit level; or

(b) a Qualifying Value Content (QVC) not less than 35% of the Ex-Works
Price.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a good that falls within the classifications included
in the list of Product Specific Rules (PSR) in Annex 3A (Product Specific Rules
(PSR), shall satisfy the specific rule pertaining to it detailed therein.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the QVC shall be calculated as follows:

_ ExWorks Price —V.N.M

— 1
QVve ExWorks Price * 100

where:
QVC is the qualifying value content of a good expressed as a percentage;

Ex-Works Price is the price paid for the good ex-works to the manufacturer in
the Party in whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out,
provided the price includes the value of all the materials used, minus any
internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the good obtained is exported;
and

V.N.M. (Value of Non-originating Materials) means:

(a) the customs value at the time of importation of the non-originating
materials used inclusive freight and insurance costs incurred in
transporting the material to the importation port in the territory of the
importing Party or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the
first ascertainable price paid for the materials in the exporting Party; and

(b) where the producer of a good acquires non-originating materials in the
territory of the Party where the producer is located, the value of such
materials shall not include freight, insurance, packing costs and any
other costs incurred in transporting the material from the supplier’s
warehouse to the producer’s location.

3-4

Article 3.5: Intermediate Goods

If a good which has acquired originating status in the territory of a Party in accordance
with Article 3.4 (Sufficient Working or Processing) is used in the manufacture of
another product, the conditions applicable to the product in which it is incorporated do
not apply to it, and no account shall be taken of the non-originating materials which
may have been used in its manufacture.

Article 3.6: Accumulation

l.

An originating good of a Party which is used in the processing or production in the
territory of the other Party as material for finished goods shall be deemed as a
material originating in the territory of the latter Party where the working or
processing of the finished goods has taken place.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1, an originating good of a Party that does not undergo
processing beyond the insufficient working or processing operations listed in
Article 3.8 (Insufficient Working or Processing) in the other Party shall retain its
originating status of the former Party.

The Joint Committee may agree to review this Article with a view to providing for
other forms of accumulation for the purposes of qualifying goods as originating
goods under this Agreement.

Article 3.7: Tolerance

1.

Notwithstanding Article 3.4 (Sufficient Working or Processing), a good will be
considered to have undergone a change in tariff classification if the value of all non-
originating materials that are used in the production of the good and that do not
undergo the applicable change in tariff classification does not exceed 20 percent of
the Ex-Works Price of the good.

The value of non-originating materials referred to in paragraph | shall be included
in the value of the non-originating materials for any applicable qualifying value
content requirement.

Article 3.8: Insufficient Working or Processing

1.

Whether or not the requirements of Article 3.4 (Sufficient Working or Processing)

are satisfied, a good shall not be considered to be originating in the territory of a
Party if the following operations are undertaken exclusively by itself or in
combination in the territory of that Party:

(a) slaughter of animals;
(b) operations to ensure the preservation of products in good condition

during transport and storage such as drying, freezing, ventilation,
chilling and like operations;

3-5

(c)

(d)
(c)
(f)
(g)

(h)
(i)

Qj)

(k)

(I)

(m)

sifting, washing, simple cutting, slitting, bending, coiling or uncoiling,
sharpening, simple grinding, slicing;

cleaning, including removal of oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;
simple painting and polishing operations;
simple testing or calibration;

simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on
cards or boards and packaging operations;

simple mixing of goods, whether or not of different kinds;

simple assembly of parts of products to constitute a complete good or
disassembly of products into parts;

simple changes of packing, unpacking or repacking operations, and
breaking up and assembly of consignments;

affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing
signs on goods or their packaging;

husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing and glazing of cereals and
rice; and

mere dilution with water or another substance that does not materially
alter the characteristics of the goods.

2. All the operations carried out in the territory of the exporting Party on a given
product shall be taken into account when determining whether the working or
processing undergone by that product is to be regarded as insufficient within the
meaning of paragraph 1.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the terms “simple” and “simple mixing” are
defined as follows:

(a)

(b)

simple generally describes an activity which does not need special
skills, machines, apparatus or equipment specially produced or installed
for carrying out the activity. However, handcrafts items made by
artisans like embroidery, pottery, handwoven blankets, handmade
jewelry, and quilts stitched by hand are not to be considered as simple
operations; and

simple mixing generally describes an activity which does not need

special skills, machine, apparatus or equipment specially produced or
installed for carrying out the activity.

3-6

Article 3.9: Indirect Materials

In order to determine whether a good is an originating good, the following material
used in its production shall be treated as originating material, irrespective of the
origin of such material is originated:

(a) energy and fuel;
(b) plant and equipment;
(c) machines and tools; and

(d) other materials or goods used in the production, testing or inspection
of a good and do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the
final composition of the good.

Article 3.10: Accessories, Spare Parts, Tools

1. Accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other information materials
delivered with a good that form part of the good’s standard accessories, spare parts,
tools, and instructional or other information materials shall be regarded as a part of
the good, and shall be disregarded in determining whether or not all the non-
originating materials used in the production of the originating goods undergo the
applicable change in tariff classification provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other information
materials are classified with and not invoiced separately from the good;
and

(b) the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts, tools, and
instructional or other information materials presented with the good are
customary for the good.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, for goods that are subject to a qualifying value
content requirement, the value of the accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional
or other information materials shall be taken into account as originating or non-
originating materials, as the case may be, in calculating the qualifying value content
of the goods.

Article 3.11: Packaging Materials and Containers for Retail Sale

1. Each Party shall provide that packaging materials and containers in which a good
is packaged for retail sale, if classified with the good, according to Rule 5 of the
General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonised System, shall be
disregarded in determining whether all the non-originating materials used in the
production of the good undergo the applicable change in tariff classification.

2. If the good is subject to a qualifying value content requirement, the value of such
packaging materials and containers shall be taken into account as originating or

3-7

non-originating materials, as the case may be, in calculating the qualifying value
content of the good.

Article 3.12: Unit of Qualification

The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Chapter shall
be the particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining
classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonised System. Accordingly, it
follows that:

(a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is
classified under a single heading, the whole group or assembly shall
constitute the unit of qualification;

(b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical products
classified under a single tariff line, each product shall be taken
individually into account when in determining whether it qualifies as
an originating good.

Article 3.13: Packaging Materials and Containers for Transportation and
Shipment

Each Party shall provide that packing materials and containers for transportation and
shipment are disregarded in determining whether a good is originating.

Article 3.14: Fungible Goods or Materials

1. Each Party shall provide that the determination of whether fungible goods or
materials are originating shall be made through physical segregation of each good
or material, or, in case of any difficulty, through the use of any inventory
management method, such as averaging, last-in, first-out, or first-in, first out,
recognised in the generally accepted accounting principles of the Party in which the
production is performed, or otherwise accepted by the Party in which the production
is performed.

2. Each Party shall provide that an inventory management method selected under
paragraph | for particular fungible goods or materials shall continue to be used for
those fungible goods or materials throughout the fiscal year of the Party that
selected the inventory management method.

Article 3.15: Sets of Goods

Sets, as defined in the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonised System,
shall be regarded as originating when all component goods are originating. However,
when a set is composed of originating and non-originating goods, the set as a whole
shall be regarded as originating, provided that the customs value of non-originating
goods does not exceed 20 percent of the Ex-Works Price of the set.

3-8

SECTION B: TERRITORIALITY AND TRANSIT

Article 3.16: Principle of Territoriality

1.

2.

The conditions for acquiring originating status set out in Article 3.2 (Originating
Goods) must be fulfilled without interruption in the territory of the Party concerned.

Where originating goods exported from the territory of a Party to a non-party, return
to the exporting Party, they must be considered as non-originating, unless it can be
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:

(a) the returning goods are the same as those exported; and
(b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to

preserve them in good condition while in that non-party or while being
exported.

Article 3.17: Transit and Transshipment

1.

2.

Each Party shall provide that an originating good retains its originating status if the
good has been transported directly to the importing Party without passing through
the territory of a non-party.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1, each Party shall provide that the originating goods
retain their originating status if in transit or is stored in a temporary warehousing
through one or more non-parties, provided that the goods:

(a) remained under customs control in the territory of the non-party or non-
parties of transit or storage and they are not intended for trade,
consumption, use or employment in the non-party or non-parties where
the goods were in transit; and

(b) have not undergone any operation there other than unloading, reloading,
adding or affixing labels to ensure compliance with specific domestic
requirements of the importing Party or the non-party or non-parties of
transit, split from bulk carried out under customs supervision in the non-
party or non-parties of transit or storage or any operation required to
keep them in good condition.

An importer shall, upon request, supply appropriate evidence to the customs
authorities of the importing Party demonstrating that the goods remained under
customs supervision in the country or countries of transit or storage. Evidence that
the conditions set out in paragraph | have been fulfilled shall be supplied to the
Customs Authorities of the importing Party by the production of:

(a) any single through transport documents, that meet international
standards and that proves that the goods were directly transported from
the exporting Party through the non-party where the goods are in transit
to the importing Party;

3-9

(b) a certificate issued by the Customs Authorities of the non-party where
the goods were in transit which contains an exact description of the
goods, the date and place of loading and re-loading of the goods in that
non-party and the conditions under which the goods were placed; or

(c) in the absence of any of the above documents, any other documents that
will prove the direct shipment.

Article 3.18: Export Processing Zones, Economic Zones or Free Zones

Goods produced or manufactured in an export processing zone, economic zone or free
zone situated in the territory of a Party shall be considered as originating goods in that
Party when exported to the other Party provided that the treatment or processing is in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and supported by a proof of origin.

Article 3.19: Non-party Invoicing

1.

The customs authority in the importing Party shall not deny a claim for preferential
tariff treatment only for the reason that the invoice was issued in a third country
(non-party) and not by the exporter or producer of a good in the exporting Party
provided that the good meets the requirements in this Chapter.

The exporter of the goods shall indicate “non-party invoice” and such information
as name and country of the company issuing the invoice shall appear in the
appropriate field as detailed in Annex 3B (Certificate of Origin) or, in the case of
an origin declaration made out by an approved exporter in accordance with Article
3.23 (Origin Declaration), on the origin declaration.

. For further clarity, the exporter need not to be the person (the seller) that issues the

commercial invoice for the consignment (non-party invoicing). The seller can be
located in the territory of a non-party.

SECTION C: ORIGIN CERTIFICATION

Article 3.20: Proof of Origin

1.

Goods originating in the territory of a Party shall, on importation into the territory
of the other Party, benefit from preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement
on the basis of a Proof of Origin.

Any of the following shall be considered as a Proof of Origin:

(a) a paper format certificate of origin in issued by a competent authority in
accordance with Article 3.21 (Certificate of Origin);

(b) an electronic certificate of origin (e-Certificate) issued by a competent
authority or exchanged by a mutually developed electronic system in

3-10

(c)

(d)

accordance with Article 3.22 (Electronic Data Origin Exchange
System);

an origin declaration made out by an approved exporter in accordance
with Article 3.23 (Origin Declaration), or

Notwithstanding paragraphs | and 2, a Party may allow for a Statement
of Origin, in accordance with Annex 3D (Statement of Origin), to be
made out by any exporter where the value of the originating goods
concerned does not exceed the equivalent of US $500. However, this
shall be subject to the condition that the importation does not form part
of a series of importations which the customs authority of the importing
Party reasonably considers to have been carried out or planned for the
purpose of evading compliance with the importing Party’s laws and
regulations governing claims for preferential tariff treatment under this
Agreement.

3. Each Party shall provide that a Proof of Origin shall be completed in the English
language and shall remain valid for one year from the date on which it is issued or
made out for the purposes of obtaining preferential tariff treatment and may be
submitted within that period to the customs authorities of the importing Party.

Article 3.21: Certificate of Origin

1.

A Certificate of Origin in paper format:

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)

shall be in standard A4 white paper in accordance with the attached form
set out in Annex 3B (Certificate of Origin);

shall comprise one original and two copies. The original shall be
forwarded by the producer or exporter to the importer for submission to
the customs authority of the importing Party. The duplicate shall be
retained by the competent authority of the exporting Party. The triplicate
shall be retained by the producer or exporter;

may cover one or more goods under one consignment; and

shall be in a printed format or such other medium including electronic
format.

2. Each Certificate of Origin shall bear a unique serial reference number separately
given by each place or office of issuance.

3.

4.

A Certificate of Origin shall bear an official seal of the competent authority of the
exporting party. The official seal may be applied electronically.

In case the official seal is applied electronically, an authentication mechanism, such
as QR code or a secured website, shall be included in the certificate for the
certificate to be deemed as an original copy.

3-11

Article 3.22: Electronic Data Origin Exchange System

For the purposes of subparagraph 2(b) of Article 3.20 (Proof or Origin), the competent
authorities of the Parties shall endeavour to develop an electronic system for origin
information exchange to ensure the effective and efficient implementation of this
Chapter particularly on transmission of electronic certificate of origin.

Article 3.23: Origin Declaration

l.

For the purposes of subparagraph 2(c) of Article 3.20 (Proof or Origin), the
competent authorities of the Parties shall, in accordance with the relevant
legislation of each Party, implement provisions allowing each competent authority
to recognise an origin declaration made by an approved exporter.

The customs or competent authorities of the exporting Party may authorise any
exporter, (hereinafter referred to as “approved exporter’), who exports goods under
this Agreement, to make out Origin Declarations, a specimen of which appears in
Annex 3C (Origin Declaration), irrespective of the value of the goods concerned.

An exporter seeking such authorisation shall offer to the satisfaction of the customs
or competent authorities of the exporting Party all guarantees necessary to examine
the originating status of the goods as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements
of this Chapter.

The customs or competent authorities of the exporting Party may grant the status
of approved exporter, subject to any conditions which they consider appropriate.

The customs or competent authorities of the exporting Party shall share or publish
the list of approved exporters and periodically update it.

An Origin Declaration shall be made out by the approved exporter by typing,
stamping or printing the declaration on the invoice, the delivery note or another
commercial document which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail
to enable them to be identified. The declaration may also be hand-written; if the
declaration is hand-written, it shall be written in permanent ink in legible printed
characters.

The approved exporter making out an Origin Declaration shall be prepared to
submit at any time, at the request of the customs or competent authorities of the
exporting Party, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the
goods concerned, as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter.

Article 3.24: Issuance and Verification of a Certificate of Origin

l.

Certificates of Origin shall be issued by the competent authority of the exporting
Party, either upon an electronic application or an application in paper form, having
been made by the exporter or under the exporter's responsibility by his or her
authorised representative, in accordance with the domestic laws and regulations of
the exporting Party.

3-12

2. The exporter applying for the issuance of a Certificate of Origin shall be prepared

to submit at any time, at the request of the competent authority of the exporting
Party, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the goods
concerned, as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter.

The competent authority shall, to the best of its competence and ability, carry out
proper verification to ensure that:

(a) the application and the Certificate of Origin is duly completed and
signed by the authorised signatory;

(b) the origin of the good is in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter; and

(c) HS Code, description, gross weight or other quantity and value conform
to the goods to be exported.

Article 3.25: Certificate of Origin Issued Retrospectively

1.

The Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the competent authority of the exporting
Party prior to or at the time of shipment.

In exceptional cases where a Certificate of Origin has not been issued prior to or at
the time of shipment, due to involuntary errors or omissions or other valid causes,
the Certificate of Origin may be issued retrospectively but with a validity no longer
than one year from the date of shipment, in which case it is necessary to indicate
“ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY” in the appropriate field as detailed in Annex 3B
(Certificate of Origin).

The provisions of this Article shall be applied to goods which comply with the
provisions of this Agreement, and which on the date of its entry into force, are either
in transit or are in the territory of the Parties in temporary storage under customs
control. This shall be subject to the submission to the customs authorities of the
importing Party, within six months from the said date, of a Certificate of Origin
issued retrospectively by the Competent Authority of the exporting Party together
with documents, showing that the goods have been transported directly in
accordance with the provisions of Article 3.17 (Transit and Transshipment).

Article 3.26: Loss of the Certificate of Origin

The certified true copy of the original Certificate of Origin shall be endorsed with an
official signature and seal and bear the words “CERTIFIED TRUE COPY” and the
date of issuance of the original Certificate of Origin in appropriate field as detailed in
Annex 3B (Certificate of Origin). The certified true copy of a Certificate of Origin shall
be issued within the same validity period of the original Certificate of Origin.

Article 3.27: Importation by Instalments

Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs
authorities of the importing Party, dismantled or non-assembled goods within the
meaning of Rule 2(a) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonised
System are imported by instalments, a single proof of origin for such goods can be
submitted to the customs authorities provided that the said goods are covered by a
single commercial invoice.

Article 3.28: Treatment of Erroneous Declaration in the Certificate of Origin

Neither erasures nor superimposition shall be allowed on the Certificate of Origin. Any
alterations shall be made by issuing a new certificate of origin to replace the erroneous
one. The reference number of the corrected Certificate of Origin should be indicated
in the appropriate field on the newly issued Certificate of Origin as detailed in Annex
3B (Certificate of Origin). The validity of the replacement certificate will be the same
as the original.

Article 3.29: Treatment of Minor Discrepancies

1. The discovery of minor discrepancies between the statements made in the Proof of
Origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs authority of the
importing Party for the purposes of carrying out the formalities for importing the
goods shall not ipso-facto invalidate the proof of origin, if it does in fact correspond
to the goods submitted.

2. Obvious formal errors, such as typing errors, on a proof of origin should not cause
this document to be rejected if these errors are not such as to create doubts
concerning the correctness of the statements made in this document.

SECTION D: COOPERATION AND ORIGIN VERIFICATION

Article 3.30: Denial of Preferential Tariff Treatment

1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, the customs authority of the
importing Party may deny a claim for preferential tariff treatment or recover unpaid
duties, in accordance with its laws and regulations, where:

(a) the good does not meet the requirements of this Chapter;

(b) the importer, exporter or producer of the good failed to comply with any
of the relevant requirements of this Chapter for obtaining preferential
tariff treatment;

(c) the customs or competent authority of the importing Party has not
received sufficient information from the importer to determine that the
good is originating; or

(d) the competent authority or customs authority of the exporting Party does
not comply with the requirements of verification in accordance with
Article 3.31 (Retroactive Check).

2. If the customs authority of the importing Party denies a claim for preferential tariff
treatment, it shall, upon request by the importer, provide its reasons for the decision
in writing to the importer.

3. Upon being communicated the grounds for denial of preferential tariff treatment,
the importer may, within the period provided for in the custom laws of the
importing Party, file an appeal against such decision with the appropriate authority
under the customs laws and regulations of the importing Party.

Article 3.31: Retroactive Check

1. Subsequent verifications of Proofs of Origin shall be carried out at random or
whenever the customs authority of the importing Party has reasonable doubts as to
the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the goods concerned
or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter.

2. For the purposes of implementing paragraph 1, the customs authority or the
competent authority of the importing Party, as the case may be, shall send a
verification request to the competent authority of the exporting Party by e-mail or
any other means that records receipt, including a copy of the Proof of Origin and
the reasons for the inquiry. Any other document and information obtained
suggesting that the information given on the Proof of Origin is incorrect shall be
sent in support of the request for verification.

3. The verification shall be carried out by the competent authority of the exporting
Party. For this purpose, they shall have the right to carry out inspections at the
exporter’s or producer’s premises, to call for any evidence, check the exporter’s
and the producer’s records, or any other check considered appropriate related to
origin and according to the procedures of its domestic legislation.

4. The customs authority or the competent authority of the importing Party, as the case
may be, requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of this
verification within six months of the date of the receipt of the verification request.
These results must indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and
whether the goods concerned can be considered as originating and fulfil the other
requirements of this Chapter.

5. If the customs authority or the competent authority of the importing Party, as the
case may be, receives no reply within the established period or if the reply does not
contain sufficient information regarding the authenticity of the Proof of Origin or
the originating status of the goods, or if the reply determines that the goods were
not originating or that the Proofs of Origin were not authentic, the customs authority
or the competent authority, as the case may be, may deny preferential tariff
treatment to the goods covered by the Proof of Origin which is subject to
verification.

Article 3.32: Record Keeping Requirement

1. For the purposes of the verification process pursuant to Article 3.31 (Retroactive
Check), each Party shall require that:

(a) the manufacturer, producer or exporter retain, for a period not less than
five years from the date of issuance of the Proof of Origin, or a longer
period in accordance with its domestic laws and regulations, all
supporting records necessary to prove that the goods for which the Proof
of Origin was issued were originating;

(b) The importers shall retain, for a period not less than five years from the
date of importation of the goods, or a longer period in accordance with
its domestic laws and regulations, all records to prove that the goods for
which preferential tariff treatment was claimed were originating; and

(c) The competent authority or issuing authority retain, for a period not less
than five years from the date of issuance of the Proof of Origin, or a
longer period in accordance with its domestic laws and regulations, all
supporting records of the application for the Proof of Origin.

2. The records referred to in paragraph 1 may be maintained in any medium that
allows for prompt retrieval, including but not limited to, digital, electronic, optical,
magnetic, or written form.

Article 3.33: Confidentiality

All information related to the application of this Chapter communicated between the
Parties shall be treated as confidential. It shall not be disclosed by the authorities of the
Parties without permission of the person or authority providing it, except if required in
the course of administrative and judicial proceedings, in accordance with each Party's
laws and regulations. In such instances, the Party disclosing the information should
inform the other Party.

Article 3.34: Contact Points

Each Party shall endeavour to designate, within 150 days of the date of entry into force
of this Agreement, one or more contact points within its competent authority for the
implementation of this Chapter and notify the other Party of the contact details of that
contact point or those contact points. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party
of any change to those contact details.

Article 3.35: Mutual Assistance

The competent authorities of the Parties shall provide each other with the following
before the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and with any update thereafter:

(a) A specimen impression of the official stamps used in their offices for
the issue of Certificate of Origin;

3-16

(b) Name and address of the competent authorities responsible for
verifying the Proof of Origin;

(c) Secured web address for the QR codes and electronic
certificates authentications, if applicable.

SECTION E: CONSULTATION AND MODIFICATIONS

Article 3.36: Subcommittee on Rules of Origin

1. A Subcommittee on Rules of Origin (hereinafter referred to as the “Subcommittee’’)
is hereby established, consisting of representatives of each Party. The
Subcommittee shall meet, in person or by any other means, as necessary.

2. The Subcommittee may consider any matter arising under this Chapter.

3. In relation to a matter referred to in paragraph 2, the functions of the Subcommittee
may include:

(a) monitoring the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

(b) revising the Product Specific Rules (PSR) list in Annex 3A (Product
Specific Rules (PSR)), on the basis of the transposition of the HS or at
the request of either Party;

(c) making recommendations to the Joint Committee with regards to
matters of its competence;

(d) developing “Explanatory Notes” for the interpretation and application
of this Chapter; and

(e) carrying out other functions as may be assigned by the Joint Committee
or agreed by the Parties.

4. The Joint Committee shall establish the rules of working procedures of the
Subcommittee.

CHAPTER 4
CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TRADE FACILITATION

Article 4.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

Authorised Economic Operator(s) (AEO) means the programme which recognises
an operator involved in the international movement of goods in whatever function that
has been approved by the national Customs Administration as complying with the
World Customs Organisation (WCO) or equivalent supply chain security standards;

Customs Administration means the Federal Authority of Identity, Citizenship,
Customs and Port Security for the UAE, and the General Department of Viet Nam
Customs for Viet Nam;

Customs laws mean legislations and regulations concerning the importation,
exportation, transit of goods, or any other customs procedures whether relating to
customs duties, taxes or any other charges collected by the Customs Administrations,
or to measures for prohibition, restriction, or control enforced by the Customs
Administrations;

Customs Mutual Assistance Agreement (CMAA) means the agreement that further
enhances customs cooperation and exchange of information between the Parties to
secure and facilitate lawful trade.

Customs procedures mean the measures applied by the customs authority of a Party
to goods and to the means of transport that are subject to its customs laws and
regulations;

Mutual Recognition Arrangement (MRA) means the arrangement between the
Parties that mutually recognise AEO authorisations that have been properly granted by
one of the Customs Administrations; and

Person means both natural and legal person, unless the context otherwise requires.
Article 4.2: Scope

This Chapter shall apply, in accordance with the Parties’ respective national laws, rules
and regulations, to customs procedures required for clearance of goods traded between
the Parties.

Article 4.3: Objectives

The Parties recognise the importance of customs and trade facilitation matters in the
global trading environment, and shall endeavour to strengthen cooperation in this area

4-1

with a view to supporting their respective customs legislation and procedures in
fulfilling the objectives of promoting trade facilitation while ensuring effective customs
control.

Article 4.4: General Provisions

The Parties agree that their customs laws and customs procedures shall be
transparent, non-discriminatory, consistent and avoid unnecessary procedural
obstacles to trade.

Customs procedures of the Parties shall conform, where possible, to the
standards and recommended practices of the World Customs Organisation.

The Customs Administration of each Party shall periodically review its customs
procedures with a view to their further simplification and development to
facilitate bilateral trade.

Article 4.5: Publication and Availability of Information

I.

Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, guidelines, procedures, and
administrative rulings governing customs matters are promptly published, either
on the Internet or in print form in the English language, to the extent possible.

Each Party shall designate, establish, and maintain one or more inquiry points
to address inquiries from interested persons pertaining to customs matters, and
shall endeavour to make available publicly through electronic means,
information concerning procedures for making such inquiries.

Nothing in this Article or in this Agreement shall require any Party to publish
law enforcement procedures and internal operational guidelines including those
related to conducting risk analysis and targeting methodologies.

Each Party shall, to the extent practicable, and in a manner consistent with its
domestic law and legal system, ensure that new or amended laws and regulations
of general application related to the movement, release, and clearance of goods,
including goods in transit, are published or information on them made otherwise
publicly available, as early as possible before their entry into force, so that
interested parties have the opportunity to become acquainted with the new or
amended laws and regulations. Such information and publications shall be
available in the English language, to the extent possible.

Article 4.6: Risk Management

The Parties shall adopt a risk management approach in its customs activities, based on
its identified risk of goods, in order to facilitate the clearance of low-risk consignments,
while focusing its inspection activities on high-risk goods.

4-2

Article 4.7: Paperless Communications

1.

For the purposes of facilitating bilateral exchange of international trade data and
expediting procedures for the release of goods, the Parties shall endeavour to
provide an electronic environment that supports communication and
transactions between their respective Customs Administration and their trading
entities.

The Parties shall exchange views and information on realising and promoting
paperless communications between their respective Customs Administration
and their trading entities.

The respective Customs Administration of the Parties, in implementing
initiatives which provide for the use of paperless communications, shall take
into account the methodologies agreed at the WCO.

Article 4.8: Advance Rulings

1.

In accordance with its commitments under the WTO Agreement on Trade
Facilitation, set out in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement, the Customs
Administration of the Parties upon a request shall issue an advance ruling, in a
reasonable time-bound manner, prior to the importation of a good into their
territory based on a request containing all the necessary information in relation
to:

(a) tariff classification;
(b) origin of goods; and

(c) the application of valuation criteria for a particular case, in accordance
with the Customs Valuation Agreement.

The importing Party shall apply an advance ruling issued by it under paragraph
1 on the date that the ruling is issued or on a later date specified in the ruling
and remain in effect for a reasonable period of time and in accordance with the
national procedures on advanced ruling unless the advance ruling is modified or
revoked.

The advance ruling issued by the Party shall be binding to the person to whom
the ruling is issued only.

A Party may decline to issue an advance ruling if the facts and circumstances
forming the basis of the advance ruling are the subject of an administrative or
judicial review or appeal. A Party that declines to issue an advance ruling shall
promptly notify, in writing, the person requesting the ruling, setting out the
relevant facts and circumstances and the basis for its decision.

The importing Party may modify or revoke an advance ruling:

4-3

6.

8.

(a) if the ruling was based on an error of fact;

(b) if there is a change in the material facts or circumstances on which the
ruling was based;

(c) to conform with a modification of this Chapter; or
(d) — to conform with a judicial decision or a change in its domestic law.

Each Party shall provide written notice to the applicant explaining the Party’s
decision to revoke or modify the advance ruling issued to the applicant.

Each Party shall provide that any modification or revocation of an advance
ruling shall be effective on the date on which the modification or revocation is
issued, or on such later date as may be specified therein. That modification or
revocation of an advance ruling shall not be applied to importations of a good
that have occurred prior to that date, unless the person to whom the advance
ruling was issued has not acted in accordance with its terms and conditions.

Notwithstanding paragraph 3, the issuing Party may postpone the effective date
of the modification or revocation of an advance ruling for a reasonable period
of time and in accordance with each Party’s national laws or procedures on
advance rulings, where the person to whom the advance ruling was issued
demonstrates that he has relied in good faith to his detriment on that ruling.

Article 4.9: Penalties

Each Party shall maintain measures applicable in imposing penalties, under its
domestic law for violations of the Party’s customs laws, regulations or
procedural requirements.

Each Party shall ensure that penalties issued for a breach of a customs law,
regulations or procedural requirements are imposed only on the person
responsible for the breach under its laws.

Each Party shall ensure that the penalty imposed by its Customs Administration
is dependent on the facts and circumstances of the case and is commensurate
with the degree and severity of the breach.

Each Party shall ensure that it maintains measures to avoid conflicts of interest
in the assessment and collection of penalties and duties.

Each Party shall ensure that if a penalty is imposed by its Customs
Administration for a breach of a customs law, regulation or procedural
requirement, an explanation in writing is provided to the person upon whom the
penalty is imposed specifying the nature of the breach and the law, regulation
or procedure used for determining the penalty amount.

4-4

Article 4.10: Release of Goods

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain simplified customs procedures for the
efficient release of goods in order to facilitate trade.

2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that:

(a) provide for the expedite release of goods upon receipt of the customs
declaration and fulfilment of all applicable requirements and
procedures;

(a) provide for the electronic submission and processing of documentation
and data, including manifests, prior to the arrival of the goods in order
to expedite the release of goods from customs control upon arrival;

(b) allow goods to be released at the point of arrival without requiring
temporary transfer to warehouses or other facilities; and

(c) inform the importer the reasons why the goods are not released,
including, to the extent permitted by its laws, which border agency, if
not the Customs Administration, has withheld release of goods.

3. Nothing in this Article requires a Party to release a good if its requirements for
release have not been met nor prevents a Party from liquidating a security
deposit in accordance with its law.

4. Each Party may allow, to the extent practicable and in accordance with its
customs laws, goods intended for import to be moved within its territory under
customs control from the point of entry into the Party’s territory to another
customs office in its territory from where the goods are intended to be released,
provided the applicable regulatory requirements are met.

Article 4.11: Authorised Economic Operators

In order to facilitate trade and enhance compliance and risk management between them,
the Parties shall endeavour to mutually conclude an Authorised Economic Operator
(AEO) Mutual Recognition Arrangement (MRA).

Article 4.12: Border Agency Cooperation

Each Party shall ensure that its authorities and agencies responsible for border controls
and procedures dealing with the importation, exportation, and transit of goods

cooperate with one another and coordinate their activities in order to facilitate trade
pursuant to this Chapter.

4-5

Article 4.13: Expedited Shipments

Each Party shall adopt or maintain expedited customs procedures for goods entered
through air cargo facilities while maintaining appropriate customs control and
selection. These procedures shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

provide for information necessary to release an express shipment to be
submitted and processed before the shipment arrives;

allow a single submission of information covering all goods contained
in an express shipment, such as a manifest through, if possible,
electronic means!;

to the extent possible, provide for the release of certain goods with a
minimum of documentation;

under normal circumstances, provide for express shipments to be
released as fast as possible after submission of the necessary customs
documents, provided the shipment has arrived;

apply to shipments of any weight or value recognising that a Party may
require formal entry procedures as a condition for release, including
declaration and supporting documentation and payment of customs
duties, based on the good’s weight or value; and

provide that, under normal circumstances, shipments values at or below
a fixed amount set under a Party’s law shall be exempted from customs
duty.”

Article 4.14: Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall ensure that any person to whom it issues a determination on a
customs matter has access to:

(a)

(b)

at least one level of administrative review of determinations by its
Customs Administration independent? of either the official or office
responsible for the decision under review; and

judicial review of decisions taken at the final level of administrative
review.

' Additional documents may be required as a condition for release.

? Notwithstanding this Article, a Party may assess customs duties, or may require formal entry
documents, for restricted or controlled goods, such as goods subject to import licensing or similar

requirements.

>The level of administrative review for the UAE may include the competent authority supervising the
Customs Administration.

4-6

2. Each Party shall ensure that its procedures for appeal and review are carried out

in a non-discriminatory and timely manner.

Each Party shall ensure that an authority conducting a review or appeal under
paragraph 1 notifies the person in writing of its determination or decision in the
review or appeal, and the reasons for the determination or decision.

Article 4.15: Customs Cooperation

I.

1. With a view to further enhancing customs cooperation, the Customs
Administrations of the Parties will consider to conclude and adopt a Customs
Mutual Assistance Agreement whenever possible.

The Contracting Parties shall, for the purposes of applying customs legislations
and to give effect to the provisions of this Agreement, endeavour to:

(a) co-operate and assist each other in the prevention and investigation of
offences against customs legislations;

(b) upon request, provide each other information to be used in the
enforcement of customs legislations; and

(c) co-operate in the research, development and application of new customs
procedures, in the training and exchange of personnel, sharing of best
practices, and in other matters of mutual interest.

Assistance under this Chapter shall be provided in accordance with the domestic
law of the requested Party and the Party’s available resources.

The Parties shall exchange official contact points with a view to facilitating the
effective implementation of this Chapter.

Article 4.16: Confidentiality

I.

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party to furnish or allow
access to confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law
enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or which would
prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or
private.

Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with its domestic law, the
confidentiality of information obtained pursuant to this Chapter and shall protect
that information from disclosure that could prejudice the competitive position
of the persons providing the information.

Any information received under this Chapter shall be treated as confidential and
shall not be provided to a third party without written consent of the providing
Party.

4-7

CHAPTER 5
TRADE REMEDIES

Article 5.1: Scope

1.

With respect to the UAE, this Chapter shall apply to the trade remedies investigations
and measures that are taken under the authority of the Minister of Economy or its
successor.

With respect to Viet Nam, this Chapter shall apply to the trade remedies investigations
and measures that are taken under the authority of the Minister of Industry and Trade
of Viet Nam or its successor.

Article 5.2: Anti-Dumping and Countervailing Measures

1.

The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under the provisions of Article VI and
Article XVI of the GATT 1994, the Anti-Dumping Agreement and the SCM
Agreement.

The Parties recognise the right to apply measures consistent with Article VI of the
GATT 1994, the Anti-Dumping Agreement, the SCM Agreement, and the importance
of promoting transparency.

. Except as otherwise stipulated in this Article, this Agreement does not confer any

additional rights or obligations on the Parties with regard to anti-dumping and
countervailing measures, including the initiation and conduct of anti-dumping and
countervailing duty investigations, as well as the application of anti-dumping and
countervailing measures.

When the investigating authority of a Party receives a properly documented application
by or on behalf of its domestic industry for the initiation of an anti-dumping
investigation in respect of a product from the other Party, the former Party shall notify
the other Party of the application as far in advance of the initiation of such investigation
and by no later than 10 days before the date of initiation of the investigation.

As soon as possible after accepting a properly documented application for a
countervailing duty investigation in respect of a product of the other Party, and in any
event before initiating an investigation, the Party shall provide written notification of
its receipt of the application to the other Party and invite the other Party for
consultations with the aim of clarifying the situation as to the matters referred to in the
application and arriving at a mutually agreed solution.

5-1

6. The investigating authority of each Party shall ensure, before a final determination is
made, the disclosure of all essential facts under consideration which form the basis for
the decision whether to apply definitive measures. This is without prejudice to Article
6.5 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement and Article 12.4 of the SCM Agreement.
Disclosures shall be made in writing and allow interested parties sufficient time to
make their comments.

7. Interested parties should be granted the right to express their views during anti-
dumping and countervailing duty investigations in accordance with the conditions of
each Party’s domestic laws and regulations.

8. The Parties shall observe the following practices in anti-dumping or countervailing
cases between them in order to enhance transparency in the implementation of the
WTO Agreement:

(a) when dumping margins are established, assessed, or reviewed under
Articles 2, 9.3, 9.5, and 11 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement regardless of
the comparison bases under Article 2.4.2 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement,
all individual margins, whether positive or negative, should be counted
toward the average;

(b) if a decision is taken to impose an anti-dumping duty pursuant to Article
9.1 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement, the Party taking such a decision may
apply the “lesser duty” rule, by imposing a duty which is less than the
dumping margin where such lesser duty would be adequate to remove the
injury to the domestic industry; and

(c) the investigating Party shall request an exporter or producer in the territory
of the other Party for a timely response to its questionnaires. When the
investigating Party finds a major deficiency in information in a
questionnaire response from relevant exporter or producer received before
the deadline or requires clarifications for the purposes of investigation, the
investigating Party shall demand the missing information or request
clarification of information concerning the answers to the questionnaires.
This procedure shall not be used to cause unwarranted delays in the
investigation or to circumvent the deadlines which are provided in the
Party’s domestic laws and regulations.

9. In an anti-dumping investigation, where a Party’s authorities have made a preliminary
affirmative determination of dumping and injury caused by such dumping, the Party
shall afford due consideration and adequate opportunity for consultations, to exporters
of the other Party regarding proposed price undertakings which, 1f accepted, may result
in the suspension of the investigation without the imposition of anti-dumping duties,
through the means provided for in the Party’s domestic laws and regulations.

5-2

10. In a countervailing duty investigation, where a Party’s authorities have made a
preliminary affirmative determination of subsidisation and injury caused by such
subsidisation, the Party shall afford due consideration and adequate opportunity for
consultations, to the other Party and exporters of the other Party, regarding proposed
undertakings on price, which, if accepted, may result in the suspension of the
investigation without the imposition of countervailing duties, through the means
provided for in the Party’s domestic laws and regulations.

11. The Parties agree to examine, with special care, any application for the initiation of an
antidumping investigation on a good originating in the other Party and on which anti-
dumping measures have been terminated in the previous 12 months as a result of a
review. Unless this pre-initiation examination indicates that the circumstances have
changed, the investigation shall not proceed.

12. When imports of a product from more than one country are simultaneously subject to
anti-dumping or countervailing duty investigation, a Party shall examine, with special
care, whether the cumulative assessment of the effect of the imports from the other
Party is appropriate in light of the conditions of competition between the imported
goods and the conditions of competition between the imported goods and the like
domestic goods.

Article 5.3: Transitional Safeguard Measures

1. For the purposes of this Article:

domestic industry means, with respect to an imported product, the producers as a whole
of the like or directly competitive products operating within the territory of a Party, or those
producers whose collective output of the like or directly competitive products constitutes

a major proportion of the total domestic production of that product;

provisional transitional safeguard measure means a provisional safeguard measure
described in paragraph 12;

serious injury means a significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic
industry;

threat of serious injury means serious injury that, on the basis of facts and not merely on
allegation, conjecture or remote possibility, is clearly imminent;

transition period, means, in relation to a particular product, the period of the staged tariff
elimination for that good, in accordance with a Party’s Schedule in Annex 2A (Schedules

of Tariff Commitments) of Chapter 2 (Trade in Goods); and

transitional safeguard measure means a transitional safeguard measure described in
paragraph 2.

5-3

2. If, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement,
an Originating product of the other Party is being imported into the territory of a Party
in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic production, and
under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic
industry producing a like or directly competitive product, the importing Party may, to
the extent necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury, apply a transitional safeguard
measure consisting of:

(a) the suspension of further reduction of any rate of customs duty provided for
under this Agreement on the product; or

(b) an increase in the rate of customs duty on the product to a level not to exceed
the lesser of:

(1) the most-favoured-nation applied rate of customs duty in effect on
the day when the transitional safeguard measure is taken; or

(11) the most-favoured-nation applied rate of customs duty in effect on
the day immediately preceding the date this Agreement enters into
force.

3. A Party shall immediately notify the other Party in writing upon:
(a) initiating an investigation described in paragraph 5;

(b) making a finding of serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by
increased imports described in paragraph 2; or

(c) taking a decision to apply, extend or modify a transitional safeguard
measure.

4. On request of a Party whose product is subject to a transitional safeguard investigation
under this Article, the Party conducting that investigation shall enter into consultations
with the requesting Party with a view to reviewing the non-confidential version of the
information arising from the investigation and exchanging views on the measure.

5. A Party shall apply a transitional safeguard measure only following an investigation
by the Party’s competent authorities in accordance with Articles 3 and 4.2(c) of the
Safeguards Agreement, and to this end, Articles 3 and 4.2(c) of the Safeguards
Agreement are incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

6. In the investigation described in paragraph 5, the Party shall comply with the
requirements of Article 4.2 (a) and (b) of the Safeguards Agreement, and to this end,
Article 4.2 (a) and (b) of the Safeguards Agreement is incorporated into and made part
of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

5-4

7.

8.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities complete the investigation
referred to in paragraph 5 within one year following its date of initiation.

A Party shall not apply a transitional safeguard measure:

(a) except to the extent, and for such time, as may be necessary to prevent or
remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment;

(b) for a period exceeding two years, except that the period may be extended
by up to one year if the competent authorities of the importing Party
determine, in conformity with the procedures specified in this Article, that
the measure continues to be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury
and to facilitate adjustment and that there is evidence that the industry is
adjusting, provided that the total period of application of a transitional
safeguard measure, including the period of initial application and any
extension thereof, shall not exceed three years; or

(c) beyond the expiration of the transition period.

A Party shall not apply a transitional safeguard measure more than once on the same
product.

Where the expected duration of a transitional safeguard measure is over one year, the
Party applying the measure shall progressively liberalise it at regular intervals during
the period of application.

When a Party terminates a transitional safeguard measure, the rate of customs duty for
the originating product subject to that measure shall be the rate that, in accordance with
the Party’s Schedule in Annex 2A (Schedules of Tariff Commitments) of Chapter 2
(Trade in Goods), would have been in effect but for that measure.

In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage that would be difficult to
repair, a Party may apply a provisional transitional safeguard measure pursuant to a
preliminary determination by its competent authorities that there is clear evidence that
imports of an originating product from the other Party have increased as the result of
the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement, and such imports
have caused or are threatening to cause serious injury to the domestic industry.

Before applying a provisional transitional safeguard measure, the applying Party shall
notify the other Party.

The duration of any provisional transitional safeguard measure shall not exceed 200

days, during which time the Party applying that measure shall comply with the
requirements of paragraphs 5 and 6.

5-5

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

The Party applying the provisional transitional safeguard measure shall promptly
refund any tariff increases if the investigation described in paragraph 5 does not result
in a finding that the requirements of paragraph 2 are met. For greater certainty, the
duration of any provisional transitional safeguard measure shall be counted as part of
the period described in subparagraph 8(b).

No later than 30 days after the application of the transitional safeguard measure, the
Party applying that measure shall afford an opportunity for the other Party to consult
with the applying Party regarding appropriate trade liberalising compensation in the
form of concessions having substantially equivalent trade effects or equivalent to the
value of the additional duties expected to result from the transitional safeguard
measure. The applying Party shall provide such compensation as the Parties mutually
agree.

If the consultations under paragraph 16 do not result in an agreement on trade
liberalising compensation within 30 days of the beginning of the consultations, the
Party whose goods are subject to the transitional safeguard measure may suspend the
application of concessions, with respect to originating goods of the Party applying the
transitional safeguard measure, which have trade effects substantially equivalent to the
transitional safeguard measure.

A Party against whose product the transitional safeguard measure is applied shall notify
the Party applying the transitional safeguard measure in writing at least 30 days before
it suspends concessions in accordance with paragraph 17.

The right to suspend the application of concessions under paragraph 17 shall not be
exercised for the first 24 months during which the transitional safeguard measure is in
effect, provided that the transitional safeguard measure has been applied as a result of
an absolute increase in imports and that it conforms to this Agreement.

The obligation to provide compensation under paragraph 16 and the right to suspend
the application of concessions under paragraph 17 shall terminate on the date the
transitional safeguard measure terminates.

Article 5.4: Global Safeguard Measures

1.

2.

The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under Article XIX of the GATT 1994
and the Safeguards Agreement. This Agreement does not confer any additional rights
or obligations on the Parties with regard to actions taken under Article XIX of the
GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement.

A Party shall not apply, with respect to the same product, at the same time:

(a) a transitional safeguard measure under Article 5.3 (Transitional Safeguard
Measures); and

5-6

(b) a measure under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Safeguards
Agreement.

3. At the request of the other Party and provided that it has a substantial interest, the Party
intending to take safeguard measures shall provide immediately written notification of
all pertinent information on the initiation of the safeguard investigation, the provisional
findings and the final findings of the investigation.

4. For greater certainty, it is considered that a Party has a substantial interest when it is
among the five largest suppliers of the imported goods during the most recent three-
year period of time, measured in terms of either absolute volume or value.

Article 5.5: Cooperation on Trade Remedies

The Parties shall endeavour to encourage cooperation on trade remedies between the
relevant authorities of each Party who have responsibility for trade remedy matters.

Article 5.6: Dispute Settlement
Except for Article 5.3 (Transitional Safeguard Measures), neither Party shall have recourse

to dispute settlement under Chapter 17 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under
this Chapter.

CHAPTER 6
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
Article 6.1: Definitions

1. The definitions in Annex A of the SPS Agreement are incorporated into and made part of this
Chapter, mutatis mutandis.

2. In addition, for the purposes of this Chapter:

Competent Authority means a government body of each Party responsible for measures and
matters referred to in this Chapter;

Contact Point means the government body of each Party that is responsible for the
implementation and coordination of this Chapter; and

Emergency measure means a sanitary or phytosanitary measure that is applied by the importing
Party to a good of the exporting Party to address an urgent problem of human, animal, or plant life
or health protection that arises or threatens to arise in the importing Party.

Article 6.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to protect human, animal, and plant life or health while
facilitating trade, to enhance cooperation, communication, and transparency between the Parties,
and to ensure that the Parties’ sanitary and phytosanitary measures are science-based and do not
create unjustified barriers to trade.

Article 6.3: Scope

This Chapter shall apply to the preparation, adoption and application of all sanitary and
phytosanitary measures of each Party that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade between the
Parties.

Article 6.4: General Provisions

1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the SPS Agreement.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall limit the rights and obligations of each Party under the SPS
Agreement.

6-1

Article 6.5: Contact Points and Competent Authorities

1,

Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall designate a Contact Point or
Contact Points to facilitate communication on matters covered by this Chapter and promptly
notify the other Party no later than 30 days after the entry into force of this Agreement.

For the purposes of implementing this Chapter, the Competent Authorities of the Parties shall
be those listed in Annex 6A (Competent Authorities).

. Each Party shall keep the information on Contact Points and Competent Authorities up to date

and shall promptly inform the other Party of any change.

Article 6.6: Technical Consultations

1.

The Parties will work expeditiously to address any specific SPS trade-related issue and commit
to carry out the necessary technical level discussions in order to resolve any such issue.

At any time, a Party may raise a specific SPS issue with the other Party through the Contact
Points and the Competent Authorities, as referred to in Annex 6A (Competent Authorities),
and may request additional information related to the issue. The other Party shall respond in a
timely manner.

If an issue is not resolved through the information exchanged under paragraph 2 and Article
6.9 (Transparency and Exchange of Information), upon request of either Party through its
Contact Point, the Parties shall meet in a timely manner to discuss the specific SPS issue, to
avoid a disruption in trade, or to reach a mutually acceptable solution. The Parties shall meet
either in person or using available technological means.

Article 6.7: Equivalence

1.

The Parties recognise that the principle of equivalence as provided for under Article 4 of the
SPS Agreement has mutual benefits for both exporting Party and importing Party.

The Parties shall follow the procedures for determining the equivalence of sanitary and
phytosanitary measures and standards developed by the WTO SPS Committee and relevant
international standard-setting bodies in accordance with Annex A of the SPS Agreement,
mutatis mutandis.

The fact that an exported product achieves compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary
measures or standards that have been accepted as equivalent to sanitary and phytosanitary
measures and standards of the importing Party shall not remove the need for that product to
comply with any other relevant, mandatory requirements of the importing Party.

6-2

Article 6.8: Emergency Measures

1,

If a Party adopts an emergency measure that is necessary for the protection of human, animal,
or plant life or health, that Party shall promptly notify the other Party of that measure through
the relevant Contact Point and the Competent Authority referred to in Article 6.5 (Contact
Points and Competent Authorities). The Party adopting the emergency measure shall take into
consideration any information provided by the other Party in response to the notification and,
upon request of the other Party, the consultations between the Parties shall be held within 14
working days of the notification.

The importing Party shall consider information provided by the exporting Party in a timely
manner when making decisions with respect to consignments that, at the time of adoption of
the emergency measure, are being transported between the Parties.

If a Party adopts an emergency measure, it shall review the scientific basis of that measure
within six months and make available the results of the review to the other Party on request.
If the Party maintains the emergency measure after the review because the reason for its
adoption remains, the Party should review the measure periodically.

Article 6.9: Transparency and Exchange of Information

1.

The Parties recognise the value of transparency in the adoption and application of sanitary and
phytosanitary measures and the importance of sharing information about such measures on an
ongoing basis.

In implementing this Chapter, each Party should take into account relevant guidance of the
WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines, and recommendations.

Each Party agrees to notify a proposed sanitary or phytosanitary measure that may have an
effect on the trade of the other Party, including any that conforms to international standards,
guidelines, or recommendations, by using the WTO SPS notification submission system as a
means of notification.

The Parties shall exchange information on proposed or actual sanitary and phytosanitary
measures which affect or are likely to affect trade between them and relating to each Party’s
SPS regulatory system and to the extent that any Party desires to provide written comments on
a proposed sanitary and phytosanitary measure by the other Party, the Party shall provide those
comments in a timely manner.

A Party that proposes to adopt a sanitary or phytosanitary measure shall discuss with the other
Party, on request and if appropriate and feasible, any scientific or trade concerns that the other
Party may raise regarding the proposed measure and the availability of alternative, less trade-
restrictive approaches for achieving the objective of the measure.

Each Party shall notify the other Party of final sanitary or phytosanitary measures through the
WTO SPS notification submission system. Each Party shall ensure that the text or the notice

6-3

of a final sanitary or phytosanitary measure specifies the date on which the measure takes effect
and the legal basis for the measure. Each Party shall publish, preferably by electronic means,
notices of final sanitary or phytosanitary measures.

An exporting Party shall notify the importing Party through the Contact Points established
under Article 6.5 (Contact Points and Competent Authorities) in a timely and appropriate
manner if it has knowledge of:

(a) a significant or urgent situation of a sanitary or phytosanitary risk in its territory
that may affect current trade between the Parties; or

(b) significant changes in food safety, pest, or disease management, control, or
eradication policies or practices that may affect current trade between the Parties.

A Party shall provide to the other Party, on request, all sanitary or phytosanitary measures
related to the importation of a good into that Party’s territory.

Each Party shall provide information, upon request of the other Party, on results of import
checks in case of rejected or non-compliant consignments, including the scientific basis for
such rejections.

Article 6.10: Cooperation

1.

2.

The Parties shall cooperate to facilitate the implementation of this Chapter.

The Parties shall explore opportunities for further cooperation, collaboration, and information
exchange between the Parties on sanitary and phytosanitary matters of mutual interest related
to the implementation of the SPS Agreement, consistent with this Chapter. Those opportunities
may include trade facilitation initiatives and technical assistance.

The Parties may promote cooperation on matters related to the implementation of the SPS
Agreement, and the relevant international standard-setting bodies such as the Codex
Alimentarius Commission, the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC), and the
World Organisation for Animal Health, as appropriate.

If there is mutual interest, and with the objective of establishing a common scientific
foundation for each Party’s regulatory approach, the Competent Authorities of the Parties are
encouraged to:

(a) share best practices; and

(b) cooperate on joint scientific data collection.

6-4

CHAPTER 7
TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE
Article 7.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions shall be those contained in Annex 1 of
the TBT Agreement.

Article 7.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to facilitate trade, including by:
(a) eliminating unnecessary technical barriers to trade;
(b) enhancing transparency; and

(c) promoting greater regulatory cooperation, good regulatory practices and
joint cooperation between two Parties.

Article 7.3: Scope

1. This Chapter shall apply to the preparation, adoption, and application of all
standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures that may
affect trade in goods between the Parties.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, this Chapter shall not apply to:
(a) technical specifications prepared by a governmental body for its
production or consumption requirements which are covered by Chapter

11 (Government Procurement); or

(b) sanitary or phytosanitary measures which are covered by Chapter 6
(Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures).

Article 7.4: Affirmation of the TBT Agreement

The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other under
the TBT Agreement.

Article 7.5: International Standards

1. Each Party shall use relevant international standards, guides, and recommendations,
to the extent provided in Articles 2.4 and 5.4 of the TBT Agreement, as a basis for
its technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures.

2. In determining whether an international standard, guide, or recommendation within
the meaning of Article 2 and 5 and Annex 3 of the TBT Agreement exists, each

7-1

Party shall base its determination on the principles set out in the Decisions and
Recommendations adopted by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade
since I January 1995 as revised on 15 November 2022 (G/TBT/1/Rev15), and any
subsequent version thereof.

Article 7.6: Technical Regulations

1.

The Parties shall use international standards as a basis for preparing their technical
regulations, unless those international standards are ineffective or inappropriate for
achieving the legitimate objectives pursued. Each Party shall, upon request of the
other Party, provide its reasons for not having used international standards as a basis
for preparing its technical regulations.

Each Party shall give positive consideration to a request by the other Party to
negotiate arrangements for achieving the equivalence of technical regulations.
Where a Party refuses to negotiate such arrangements, it shall, on request of the
other Party, provide the reason for its decision.

The Parties shall strengthen communications and coordination with each other,
where appropriate, in the context of discussions on the equivalence of technical
regulations and related issues in international fora, such as the WTO Committee on
Technical Barriers to Trade.

Article 7.7: Conformity Assessment Procedures

1.

The Parties recognise that a broad range of mechanisms exists to facilitate the
acceptance in a Party's territory of the results of conformity assessment procedures
conducted in the other Party's territory. Such mechanisms may include:

(a) recognition of the existing international multilateral recognition
agreements and arrangements among accreditation bodies as well as
conformity assessment bodies to which the Parties are party;

(b) mutual recognition of conformity assessment results by the other Party.

(c) designation of conformity assessment bodies located in the territory of
the other Party;

(d) voluntary arrangements between conformity assessment bodies in the

territory of each Party;
(e) utilisation of accreditation to qualify conformity assessment bodies;
(f) acceptance of supplier’s declaration of conformity where appropriate;

(g) harmonising conformity assessment procedures as mutually agreed by
the Parties; and

(h) other mechanisms as mutually agreed by the Parties.

7-2

2. Each Party shall ensure, whenever possible, that the results of conformity
assessment procedures conducted in the territory of the other Party are accepted,
even when those procedures differ from its own, provided that those procedures
offer a satisfactory assurance of applicable technical regulations or standards
equivalent to its own procedures. Where a Party does not accept the results of a
conformity assessment procedure conducted in the territory of the other Party, it
shall, on request of the other Party, explain the reasons for its decision.

3. In order to enhance confidence in the consistent reliability of conformity
assessment results, the Parties may consult on matters such as the technical
competence of the conformity assessment bodies involved.

4. Each Party shall give positive consideration to a request by the other Party to
negotiate agreements or arrangements for the mutual recognition of the results of
their respective conformity assessment procedures in areas mutually agreed upon.

5. The Parties shall endeavour to intensify their exchange of information on
acceptance mechanisms with a view to facilitating the acceptance of conformity
assessment results.

Article 7.8: Cooperation

1. The Parties shall strengthen their cooperation in the field of standards, technical
regulations, and conformity assessment procedures with a view to:

(a) increasing the mutual understanding of their respective systems;

(b) enhancing cooperation between the Parties’ regulatory agencies on
matters of mutual interests including health, safety and environmental
protection;

(c) facilitating trade by implementing good regulatory practices; and

(d) enhancing cooperation, as appropriate, to ensure that technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures are based on
international standards or the relevant parts of them and do not create
unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

2. In order to achieve the objectives set out in paragraph 1, the Parties shall, as
mutually agreed and to the extent possible, co-operate on regulatory issues, which
may include the:

(a) promotion of good regulatory practices based on risk management
principles;
(b) exchange of information with a view to improving the quality and

effectiveness of their technical regulations;

(c) development of joint initiatives for managing risks to health, safety, or
the environment, and preventing deceptive practices; and

7-3

(d) exchange of market surveillance information where appropriate.

3. The Parties shall encourage cooperation between their respective organisations

responsible for standardisation, conformity assessment, accreditation, and
metrology, with the view to facilitating trade and avoiding unnecessary obstacles
to trade between the Parties.

The Parties shall encourage the cooperation between their relevant standardisation
activities, such as:

(a) exchange of information on standards, conformity assessment,
metrology;

(b) exchange of information relating to standards setting procedures; and

(c) concertation in areas of mutual interests at both international and

regional fora.

Article 7.9: Transparency

1.

Each Party shall, on request of the other Party, provide information, including the
objective of, and rationale for, a technical regulation or conformity assessment
procedure which the Party has adopted or proposes to adopt and may affect the
trade between the Parties, within a reasonable period of time as agreed between the
Parties.

When a proposed technical regulation is submitted for public consultation or
notified to the WTO, a Party shall give appropriate consideration to the comments
received from the other Party, and, on request of the other Party, provide written
answers to the comments made by the other Party.

The Parties shall ensure that all adopted technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures are publicly available.

Article 7.10: Contact Points

1.

For the purposes of this Chapter, the contact points are:

(a) For Viet Nam: The Commission for the Standards, Metrology and
Quality of Viet Nam, Ministry of Science and Technology, or its
successor; and

(b) For the UAE: the Standards and Regulations Sector, the Ministry of
Industry and Advanced Technology, or its successor.

2. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party of any change of its contact point.

7-4

Article 7.11: Information Exchange and Technical Discussions

1.

Any information or explanation that a Party provides on request of the other Party
pursuant to this Chapter shall be provided in print or electronically. A Party shall
endeavour to respond to such a request within 60 days of the date of receiving
request.

All communication between the Parties on any matter covered by this Chapter shall
be conducted through the contact points designated under Article 7.10 (Contact
Points).

On request of a Party for technical discussions on any matter arising under this
Chapter, the Parties shall endeavour, to the extent practicable, to enter into technical
discussions by notifying the contact points designated under Article 7.10 (Contact
Points).

7-5

CHAPTER 8
TRADE IN SERVICES

Article 8.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means any service
which is supplied neither on a commercial basis, nor in competition with one or more
service suppliers;

aircraft repair and maintenance services means such activities when undertaken on
an aircraft or a part thereof while it is withdrawn from service and do not include so-
called line maintenance;

airport operation and management services means the supply of air terminal, airfield
and other airport infrastructure operation services on a fee or contract basis. Airport
operation services do not include air navigation services;

commercial presence means any type of business or professional establishment,
including through:

(1) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical
person, or

(ii) the creation or maintenance of a branch or representative office,
within the territory of a Party for the purpose of supplying a service;

computer reservation system services means services provided by computerised
systems that contain information about air carriers’ schedules, availability, fares and
fare rules, through which reservations can be made or tickets may be issued;

ground handling services means the supply at an airport, on a fee or contract basis, of
the following: airline representation, administration and supervision; passenger
handling; baggage handling; ramp services; catering (except the preparation of the
food); air cargo and mail handling; fuelling of an aircraft; aircraft servicing and
cleaning; surface transport; and flight operations, crew administration and flight
planning. Ground handling services do not include self-handling; security; line
maintenance; aircraft repair and maintenance; or management or operation of essential
centralised airport infrastructure such as de-icing facilities, fuel distribution systems,
baggage handling systems, and fixed intra-airport transport systems;

juridical person means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised under
applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or
governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust/fund, partnership, joint
venture, sole proprietorship or association;

8-1

juridical person of the other Party means a juridical person which is either:

(1) constituted or otherwise organised under the law of that other
Party, and is engaged in substantive business operations in the
territory of:

(A) that Party; or
(B) any Member of the WTO and is owned or controlled by
natural persons of that other Party or by juridical persons that

meet all the conditions of subparagraph (i)(A); or

(11) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial
presence, owned or controlled by:

(A) natural persons of that Party; or

(B) juridical persons of that other Party identified under

subparagraph (1).
a juridical person is:
(3) “owned” by persons of a Party if more than 50 percent of the
equity interest in it is beneficially owned by persons of that
Party;

(11) “controlled” by persons of a Party if such persons have the
power to name a majority of its directors or otherwise to legally
direct its actions; or

(111) “‘affiliated” with another person when it controls, or is controlled
by, that other person; or when it and the other person are both
controlled by the same person;

measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,
procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other form;

measures by Parties means measures taken by:
(1) central, regional or local governments and authorities; and

(ii) | non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by
central, regional or local governments or authorities;

In fulfilling its obligations and commitments under this Chapter, each Party shall take
such reasonable measures as may be available to it to ensure their observance by
regional and local governments and authorities and non-governmental bodies within its
territory;

measures by Parties affecting trade in services include measures in respect of

8-2

(1) the purchase, payment or use of a service;

(11) the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a
service, services which are required by a Party to be offered to
the public generally; and

(iii) the presence, including commercial presence, of persons of a
Party for the supply of a service in the territory of the other Party;

monopoly supplier of a service means any person, public or private, which in the
relevant market of the territory of a Party is authorised or established formally or in
effect by that Party as the sole supplier of that service;

natural person of the other Party means a national or a permanent resident! of the
UAE or Viet Nam;

person means either a natural person or a juridical person;
sector of a service means:

(i) with reference to a specific commitment, one or more, or all,
subsectors of that service, as specified in a Party’s Schedule; or

(11) otherwise, the whole of that service sector, including all of its
subsectors;

selling and marketing of air transport services means opportunities for the air carrier
concerned to sell and market freely its air transport services including all aspects of
marketing such as market research, advertising and distribution. These activities do not
include the pricing of air transport services nor the applicable conditions.

services include any service in any sector except services supplied in the exercise of
governmental authority;

service consumer means any person that receives or uses a service;
service of the other Party means a service which is supplied:

(1) from or in the territory of that other Party, or in the case of
maritime transport, by a vessel registered under the laws of that
other Party, or by a person of that other Party which supplies the
service through the operation of a vessel and/or its use in whole
or in part; or

(11) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial
presence or through the presence of natural persons, by a service
supplier of that other Party;

' With respect to the UAE, the term “permanent resident” shall mean any natural person who is in
possession of a valid residency permit under the laws and regulations of the UAE.

8-3

service supplier means any person that seeks to supply or supplies a service;

supply of a service includes the production, distribution, marketing, sale and delivery
of a service;

trade in services is defined as the supply of a service:

(1) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party;
(11) in the territory of a Party to the service consumer of the other
Party;

(111) by a service supplier of a Party, through commercial presence in
the territory of the other Party;

(iv) by a service supplier of a Party, through presence of natural
persons of a Party in the territory of the other Party;

traffic rights means the right for scheduled and non-scheduled services to operate
and/or to carry passengers, cargo and mail for remuneration or hire from, to, within, or
over the territory of a Party, including points to be served, routes to be operated, types
of traffic to be carried, capacity to be provided, tariffs to be charged and their
conditions, and criteria for designation of airlines, including such criteria as number,
ownership, and control.

Article 8.2: Scope
1. This Chapter applies to measures by Parties affecting trade in services.
2. This Chapter shall not apply to:

(a) laws, regulations, or requirements governing the procurement by
government agencies of services purchased for governmental purposes
and not with a view to commercial resale or with a view to use in the
supply of services for commercial sale;

(b) services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority;

(c) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-
supported loans, guarantees, and insurance; and

> Where the service is not supplied directly by a juridical person but through other forms of commercial
presence such as a branch or a representative office, the service supplier (i.e. the juridical person) shall,
nonetheless, through such presence be accorded the treatment provided for service suppliers under the
Chapter. Such treatment shall be extended to the presence through which the service is supplied and need
not be extended to any other parts of the supplier located outside the territory where the service is
supplied.

8-4

(d)

measures affecting natural persons of a Party seeking access to the
employment market of the other Party, or measures regarding
citizenship, residence or employment on a permanent basis.

Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from applying measures to
regulate the entry of natural persons into, or their temporary stay in, its
territory, including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of,
and to ensure the orderly movement of natural persons across, its
borders, provided that such measures are not applied in such a manner
as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to any Party under the terms
of a specific commitment.’

measures affecting air traffic rights or measures affecting services
directly related to the exercise of air traffic rights, other than measures
affecting:

(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services;

(11) the selling and marketing of air transport services;

(111) | computer reservation system services;

(iv) airport operation and management services; or

(v) ground-handling services.

Article 8.3: Schedules of Specific Commitments

1. Each Party shall set out in its Schedule of Specific Commitments, the specific
commitments it undertakes in accordance with Articles 8.5 (Market Access), 8.6
(National Treatment), and 8.7 (Additional Commitments).

2. With respect to sectors where such commitments are undertaken, each Schedule of
Specific Commitments shall specify:

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)

terms, limitations and conditions on market access;
conditions and qualifications on national treatment;
undertakings relating to additional commitments;

where appropriate, the time-frame for implementation of such
commitments; and

the date of entry into force of such commitments.

3. Measures inconsistent with both Articles 8.5 (Market Access) and 8.6 (National
Treatment) shall be inscribed in the column relating to Article 8.5 (Market Access).

3 The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons of certain country and not for those of others shall
not be regarded as nullifying or impairing benefits under a specific commitment.

8-5

In this case, the inscription will be considered to provide a condition or qualification
to Article 8.6 (National Treatment) as well.

4. The Parties’ Schedules of Specific Commitments are set forth in Annex 8A
(Schedules of Specific Commitments).

Article 8.4: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

1. Except as provided for in its List of MFN Exemptions contained in Annex 8B (List
of MFN Exemptions), a Party shall accord immediately and unconditionally, in
respect of all measures affecting the supply of services, to services and service
suppliers of the other Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords to like
services and service suppliers of any non-party.

2. The obligations of paragraph 1 shall not apply to:

(a) Treatment granted under other existing or future agreements concluded
by one of the Parties and notified under Article V or V bis of the GATS
as well as treatment granted in accordance with Article VII of the GATS
or prudential measures in accordance with the GATS Annex on
Financial Services.

(b) Treatment granted by the UAE to services and service suppliers of the
Gulf Cooperation Council (“GCC”) Member States under the GCC
Economic Agreement and treatment granted by the UAE under the
Greater Arab Free Trade Area (GAFTA).

(c) Treatment granted by Viet Nam to services and service suppliers of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Member States under
any ASEAN agreement open to participation by any ASEAN Member
State, in force or signed after the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.

3. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of advantages accorded to
adjacent countries shall be governed by paragraph 3 of Article II of the GATS,
which is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.

4. If, after the entry into force of this Agreement, a Party enters into any agreement on
trade in services with a non-party, it shall consider negotiating, upon request by the
other Party, the incorporation into this Agreement of a treatment no less favourable
than that provided under the agreement with the non-party. The Parties shall take
into consideration the circumstances under which a Party enters into any agreement
on trade in services with a non-party.

Article 8.5: Market Access
1. With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified in the

definition of “trade in services” contained in Article 8.1 (Definitions), each Party
shall accord services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less

8-6

favourable than that provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions agreed
and specified in its Schedule of Specific Commitments.*

2. In sectors where market access commitments are undertaken, the measures which
a Party shall not maintain or adopt, either on the basis of a regional subdivision or
on the basis of its entire territory, unless otherwise specified in its Schedule of
Specific Commitments, are defined as:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the form of
numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the
requirements of an economic needs test;

limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the form
of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

limitations on the total number of service operations or on the total
quantity of service output expressed in terms of designated numerical
units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs
test;°

limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed
in a particular service sector or that a service supplier may employ and
who are necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific
service in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an
economic needs test;

measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint
venture through which a service supplier may supply a service; and

limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual
or aggregate foreign investment.

Article 8.6: National Treatment

1. With respect to the services sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific
Commitments, and subject to any conditions and qualifications set out therein, each
Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the other Party, in respect of

4 If a Party undertakes a market-access commitment in relation to the supply of a service through the
mode of supply referred to in the definition of “trade in services” subparagraph (w)(i) contained in
Article 8.1(Definitions) and if the cross-border movement of capital is an essential part of the service
itself, that Party is thereby committed to allow such movement of capital. If a Party undertakes a market-
access commitment in relation to the supply of a service through the mode of supply referred to in the
definition of “trade in services” paragraph (w)(i11) contained in Article 8.1 (Definitions), it is thereby
committed to allow related transfers of capital into its territory.

> Subparagraph 2(c) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of services.

8-7

all measures affecting the supply of services, treatment no less favourable than that
it accords, to its own like services and service suppliers.°

2. A Party may meet the requirement in paragraph 1 by according to services and
service suppliers of the other Party either formally identical treatment or formally
different treatment to that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.

3. Formally identical or formally different treatment by a Party shall be considered to
be less favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services
or service suppliers of that Party compared to the like service or service suppliers
of the other Party.

Article 8.7: Additional Commitments

The Parties may negotiate commitments with respect to measures affecting trade in
services not subject to scheduling under Articles 8.5 (Market Access) and 8.6 (National
Treatment), including those regarding qualification, standards or licensing matters.
Such commitments shall be inscribed in a Party’s Schedule of Specific Commitments.

Article 8.8: Modification of Schedules

1. (a) A Party (referred to in this Article as the “modifying Party”) may modify
or withdraw any commitment in its Schedule, at any time after three
years have elapsed from the date on which that commitment entered into
force, in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

(b) A modifying Party shall notify its intent to modify or withdraw a
commitment pursuant to this Article to the Joint Committee no later than
three months before the intended date of implementation of the
modification or withdrawal.

2. At the request of a Party the benefits of which under this Chapter may be affected
(referred to in this Article as an “affected Party”) by a proposed modification or
withdrawal notified under subparagraph 1(b), the modifying Party shall enter into
negotiations with a view to reaching agreement on any necessary compensatory
adjustment. In such negotiations and agreement, the Parties shall endeavour to
maintain a general level of mutually advantageous commitments not less
favourable to trade than that provided for in Schedules of Specific Commitments
prior to such negotiations.

3. If agreement is not reached between the modifying Party and the affected Party
before the end of the period provided for negotiations, the affected Party may refer
the matter to the Joint Committee.

° Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require either Party to
compensate for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of the
relevant services or service suppliers.

8-8

4. The Joint Committee shall establish procedures for rectification or modification of
Schedules. A Party which has modified or withdrawn scheduled commitments
under this Article shall modify its Schedule according to such procedures.

Article 8.9: Domestic Regulation

1. In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Party shall ensure that
all measures of general application affecting trade in services are administered in a
reasonable, objective and impartial manner.

2. (a) | Each Party shall maintain or institute as soon as practicable judicial,
arbitral or administrative tribunals or procedures which provide, on
request of an affected service supplier, for the prompt review of, and
where justified, appropriate remedies for, administrative decisions
affecting trade in services. Where such procedures are not independent
of the agency entrusted with the administrative decision concerned, the
Party shall ensure that the procedures in fact provide for an objective
and impartial review.

(b) The provisions of subparagraph (a) shall not be construed to require a
Party to institute such tribunals or procedures where this would be
inconsistent with its constitutional structure or the nature of its legal
system.

3. Where authorisation is required for the supply of a service on which a specific
commitment under this Chapter has been made, the competent authorities of each
Party shall:

(a) within a reasonable period of time after the submission of an application
considered complete under domestic laws and regulations, inform the
applicant of the decision concerning the application;

(b) in the case of an incomplete application, on request of the applicant,
identify all the additional information that is required to complete the
application and provide the opportunity to remedy deficiencies within a
reasonable timeframe;

(c) on request of the applicant, provide without undue delay information
concerning the status of the application; and

(d) if an application is terminated or denied, to the extent possible, inform
the applicant in writing and without delay the reasons for such action.
The applicant will have the possibility of resubmitting, at its discretion,
a new application.

4. With a view to ensuring that measures relating to qualification requirements and
procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements do not constitute
unnecessary barriers to trade in services, in sectors where specific commitments are
undertaken, the Parties shall aim to ensure that such requirements are:

8-9

5.

(a) based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and the
ability to supply the service;

(b) not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service;
and

(c) in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves a restriction on the
supply of the service.

In determining whether a Party is in conformity with the obligation under paragraph
4, account shall be taken of international standards of relevant international
organisations applied by that Party.’

In sectors where specific commitments regarding professional services are
undertaken, each Party shall provide for adequate procedures to verify the
competence of professionals of the other Party.

The Parties shall jointly review the results of the negotiations on disciplines on
domestic regulation, pursuant to Article VI:4 of the GATS, with a view of
incorporating them into this Chapter.

Article 8.10: Recognition

1.

For the purposes of the fulfilment, in whole or in part, of its standards or criteria
for the authorisation, licensing or certification of service suppliers, and subject to
paragraph 3, a Party may recognise, or encourage its relevant competent bodies to
recognise, the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or
certifications granted in the other Party. Such recognition, which may be achieved
through harmonisation or otherwise, may be based upon an agreement or
arrangement between the Parties or their relevant competent bodies, or may be
accorded autonomously.

Where a Party recognises, by agreement or arrangement, the education or
experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certifications granted in the
territory of a non-party, that Party shall afford the other Party adequate opportunity
to negotiate its accession to such an agreement or arrangement, whether existing or
future, or to negotiate a comparable agreement or arrangement with it. Where a
Party accords recognition autonomously, it shall afford adequate opportunity for
the other Party to demonstrate that the education, experience, licences or
certifications obtained or requirements met in that other Party's territory should also
be recognised.

A Party shall not accord recognition in a manner which would constitute a means
of discrimination between the other Party and non-parties in the application of its
standards or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or certification of service
suppliers, or a disguised restriction on trade in services.

7 The term “relevant international organisations” refers to international bodies whose membership is

open to the relevant bodies of the Parties to this Agreement.

8-10

Article 8.11: Payments and Transfers

1. Except under the circumstances envisaged in Article 8.14 (Restrictions to
Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments), a Party shall not apply restrictions on
international transfers and payments for current transactions relating to its specific
commitments.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the Parties as
members of the International Monetary Fund under the Articles of Agreement of
the Fund, including the use of exchange actions which are in conformity with the
Articles of Agreement, provided that a Party shall not impose restrictions on any
capital transactions inconsistently with its specific commitments regarding such
transactions, except under Article 8.14 (Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-
Payments) or at the request of the International Monetary Fund.

Article 8.12: Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers

The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of monopolies and exclusive service
suppliers shall be governed by paragraphs 1, 2, and 5, of Article VII of the GATS,
which are hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.

Article 8.13: Business Practices

The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of business practices shall be
governed by Article IX of the GATS, which is hereby incorporated into and made part
of this Agreement.

Article 8.14: Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments

1. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the imposition of restrictions to safeguard the
balance of payments.

2. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of such restrictions shall be
governed by paragraphs | to 3 of Article XII of the GATS, which are hereby
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement. A Party adopting or maintaining
such restrictions, or changing existing restrictions, shall promptly notify the Joint
Committee thereof.

Article 8.15: Denial of Benefits

A Party may deny the benefits of this Agreement to a service supplier that is a juridical
person, if persons of a non-party own or control that juridical person and the denying
Party:

(a) does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non-party; or

(b) adopts or maintains measures with respect to the non-party or a person
of the non-party that prohibit transactions with the juridical person or

that would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Agreement
were accorded to the juridical person.

In the case of the supply of a maritime transport service, if 1t establishes that the service
is supplied:

(a) by a vessel registered under the laws of a non-party, and

(b) by a person which operates and/or uses the vessel in whole or in part but
which is of a non-party.

Article 8.16: Review

1. With the objective of further liberalising trade in services between them, the Parties
agree to jointly review their Schedules of Specific Commitments and their Lists of
MEN Exemptions, taking into account any services liberalisation developments as
a result of on-going work under the auspices of the WTO.

2. The first such review shall take place no later than three years after the entry into
force of this Agreement.

Article 8.17: Annexes
The following Annexes form an integral part of this Chapter:

Annex 8A (Schedules of Specific Commitments)
Annex 8B (List of MFN Exemptions)

Annex 8C (Movement of Natural Persons)
Annex 8D (Telecommunications)

CHAPTER 9
DIGITAL TRADE

Article 9.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

Electronic authentication means the process or act of verifying the identity of a party
to an electronic communication or transaction and ensuring the integrity of an electronic
communication;

Electronic transmission means a transmission made using any electromagnetic means,
including by photonic means;

Open government data means information, including data, made available to the
public by the central level of government;

Personal information means any information, including data, about an identified or
identifiable natural person;

Trade administration documents means forms issued or controlled by a Party that
must be completed by or for an importer or exporter in connection with the import or
export of goods; and

Unsolicited commercial electronic message means an electronic message which is
sent for commercial or marketing purposes to an electronic address, without the consent
of the recipient or despite the explicit rejection of the recipient, through an Internet
access service supplier or, to the extent provided for under the laws and regulations of
each Party, other telecommunications service.

Article 9.2: Objectives

1. The Parties recognise the economic growth and opportunity that electronic
commerce provides, the importance of frameworks that promote consumer
confidence in electronic commerce, and the importance of facilitating the
development and use of electronic commerce.

2. The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) promote digital trade between the Parties and the wider use of electronic
commerce globally;

(b) contribute to creating an environment of trust and confidence in the use
of electronic commerce; and

9-1

(c) enhance cooperation between the Parties regarding development of
electronic commerce.

Article 9.3: General Provisions

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party that affect
trade by electronic means.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to:
(a) government procurement;

(b) information held or processed by or on behalf of a Party, or measures
related to such information, including measures related to its collection,
except for Article 9.13 (Open Government Data); or

(c) financial services and financial service suppliers as defined in the Annex
of Financial Services of the GATS.

3. For greater certainty, the Parties affirm that measures affecting the supply of a service
delivered or performed electronically are subject to the relevant provisions of
Chapter 8 (Trade in Services) and its Annexes and Chapter 10 (Investment
Facilitation), including any exception or limitation set out in this Agreement that is
applicable to such provisions.

Article 9.4: Customs Duties

1. Each Party shall maintain its current practice of not imposing customs duties on
electronic transmissions between the Parties.

2. The practice referred to in paragraph 1| is in accordance with the WTO Ministerial
Decision of 2 March 2024 in relation to the Work Programme on Electronic
Commerce (WT/MIN(24)/38).

3. Each Party may adjust its practice referred to in paragraph | with respect to any
further outcomes in the WTO Ministerial Decisions on customs duties on electronic
transmissions within the framework of the Work Programme on Electronic
Commerce.

4. The Parties shall review this Article in light of any further WTO Ministerial
Decisions in relation to the Work Programme on Electronic Commerce.

5. For greater certainty, paragraph 1| shall not preclude a Party from imposing taxes,

fees, or other charges on electronic transmissions, provided that such taxes, fees, or
charges are imposed in a manner consistent with this Agreement.

9-2

Article 9.5: Domestic Electronic Transactions Framework

Each Party shall endeavour to maintain a legal framework governing electronic
transactions consistent with the principles of the UNCITRAL Model Law on
Electronic Commerce (1996) or the United Nations Convention on the Use of
Electronic Communications in International Contracts, done at New York on
November 23, 2005.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to avoid any unnecessary regulatory burden on electronic

transactions.

Article 9.6: Electronic Authentication and Electronic Signature

1.

4.

Except in circumstances otherwise provided for under its law, a Party shall not deny
the legal validity of a signature solely on the basis that the signature is in electronic
form.

Taking into account international norms for electronic authentication, each Party
shall endeavour to:

(a) permit participants in electronic transactions to determine appropriate
electronic authentication technologies and implementation models for
their electronic transactions;

(b) not limit the recognition of electronic authentication technologies and
implementation models for electronic transactions; and

(c) permit participants in electronic transactions to have the opportunity to
prove that their electronic transactions comply with its laws and
regulations with respect to electronic authentication.

Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require that, for a particular category of
electronic transactions, the method of authentication meets certain performance
standards or is certified by an authority accredited in accordance with its laws and
regulations.

The Parties shall encourage the use of interoperable electronic authentication.

Article 9.7: Paperless Trading

l.

2.

Each Party shall endeavour to:

(a) make trade administration documents available to the public in
electronic form; and

(b) accept trade administration documents submitted electronically as the
legal equivalent of the paper version of those documents.

The Parties shall cooperate in international fora to enhance acceptance of electronic
versions of trade administration documents.

9-3

Article 9.8: Online Consumer Protection

1. The Parties recognise the importance of adopting and maintaining transparent and
effective consumer protection measures for electronic commerce as well as other
measures conducive to the development of consumer confidence.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to adopt or maintain consumer protection laws or
regulations to proscribe misleading, deceptive, and fraudulent commercial activities
that cause harm or potential harm to consumers engaged in electronic commerce.

Article 9.9: Online Personal Information Protection

1. The Parties recognise the economic and social benefits of protecting the personal
information of persons who conduct or engage in electronic transactions and the
contribution that this makes to enhancing consumer confidence in electronic
commerce.

2. To this end, each Party shall endeavour to adopt or maintain a legal framework that
provides for the protection of the personal information of the users of electronic
commerce.' In the development of any legal framework for the protection of online
personal information, each Party shall endeavour to take into account principles and
guidelines of relevant international organisations.

3. The Parties shall cooperate, to the extent possible, for the protection of personal
information transferred by any electronic means from a Party.

Article 9.10: Principles on Access to and Use of the Internet for Electronic
Commerce

To support the sustainable development and growth of electronic commerce, each Party
recognises that consumers in its territory should be able to:

(a) access and use services and applications of their choice, unless
prohibited by the Party’s laws and regulations;

(b) run services and applications of their choice, subject to the Party’s laws
and regulations, including the needs of legal and regulatory enforcement
activities; and

(c) connect their choice of devices to the Internet, provided that such
devices do not harm the network and are not otherwise prohibited by the
Party’s laws and regulations.

' For greater certainty, a Party may comply with the obligation in this paragraph by adopting or
maintaining measures such as a comprehensive privacy, personal information or personal data protection
laws, sector-specific laws covering privacy, or laws that provide for the enforcement of voluntary
undertakings by enterprises relating to privacy.

9-4

Article 9.11: Unsolicited Commercial Electronic Messages

1. Each Party shall endeavour to adopt or maintain measures regarding unsolicited
commercial electronic messages that:

(a) require a supplier of unsolicited commercial electronic messages to
facilitate the ability of a recipient to prevent ongoing reception of those
messages;

(b) require the consent, as specified in the laws and regulations of each
Party, of recipients to receive commercial electronic messages; or

(c) otherwise provide for the minimisation of unsolicited commercial
electronic messages.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to provide recourse against a supplier of unsolicited
commercial electronic messages that does not comply with a measure adopted or
maintained in accordance with paragraph 1.

3. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in appropriate cases of mutual concern
regarding the regulation of unsolicited commercial electronic messages.

Article 9.12: Cross-Border Transfer of Information by Electronic Means

Recognising the importance of the cross-border transfer of information by electronic
means in facilitating trade, and the importance of protecting personal data/information
and sensitive data/information and information of entities in its territory, the Parties
shall endeavour to refrain from imposing or maintaining unnecessary barriers to cross-
border transfer of information by electronic means when this activity is for the conduct
of business objectives in accordance with laws and regulations of each Party.

Article 9.13: Open Government Data

1. The Parties recognise that facilitating public access to and use of open government
data may foster economic and social development, competitiveness, and innovation.

2. To the extent that a Party makes government data available to the public, it is
encouraged, to the extent practicable, to ensure that the information is made
available in an open or machine readable format that allows it to be searched,
retrieved, used, reused, and redistributed freely by the public.

3. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in matters that facilitate and expand public
access to, and use of, open government data with a view to encouraging the
development of electronic commerce and creating business opportunities.

4. For greater certainty, this Article is without prejudice to a Party’s laws and

regulations, including, but not limited to, intellectual property and personal
information/data protection.

9-5

Article 9.14: Digital Government

1. The Parties recognise that electronic and digital technology can enable more efficient
government operations, improve the quality and reliability of government services,
and enable governments to better serve the needs of their citizens and other
stakeholders.

2. To this end, the Parties shall endeavour to develop and implement strategies to
digitally transform their respective government operations and services.

3. Recognising that the Parties can benefit by sharing their experiences with electronic
or digital government initiatives, the Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on
activities relating to the digital transformation of government and government
services, which may include:

(a) exchanging information and experiences on digital government
strategies and policies;

(b) sharing best practices on digital government and the digital delivery of
government services; and

(c) providing advice or training, including through exchange of officials,
and technical assistance projects, to assist the other Party in building
digital government capacity.

Article 9.15: Electronic Invoicing

1. The Parties recognise the importance of electronic invoicing, which increases the
efficiency, accuracy, and reliability of transactions.

2. The Parties recognise the benefits of interoperable electronic invoicing systems.
When developing measures related to electronic invoicing, a Party shall endeavour
to take into account international standards, where applicable, and in accordance
with its readiness in terms of capacity, regulations, and infrastructure.

3. The Parties agree to cooperate and collaborate on initiatives which promote,
encourage, support, or facilitate the adoption of e-invoicing.

Article 9.16: Digital Identities

Recognising that cooperation between the Parties on digital identities for natural
persons and enterprises will promote connectivity and further growth of digital trade,
and recognising that each Party may take different legal and technical approaches to
digital identities, the Parties shall endeavour to pursue mechanisms to promote
compatibility between their respective digital identity regimes. This may include:

(a) promoting technical interoperability between Parties’ implementation
of digital identities;

9-6

(b)

(c)

(d)

developing comparable protection of digital identities under each Party’s
respective legal frameworks, or the recognition of their legal effects,
whether accorded autonomously or by agreement;

supporting the development of international frameworks on digital
identity regimes; and

exchanging knowledge and expertise on best practices relating to digital
identity policies and regulations, technical implementation and security
standards, and the promotion of the use of digital identities.

Article 9.17: Cooperation

1. Recognising the importance of digital trade to their collective economies, the Parties
shall endeavour to maintain a mechanism of cooperation on regulatory matters
relating to digital trade with a view to sharing information and experiences.

2. The Parties have a shared vision to promote secure digital trade and recognise that
threats to cybersecurity undermine confidence in digital trade. Accordingly, the
Parties recognise the importance of cooperation in:

(a)

(b)

(c)

building the capabilities of their government agencies responsible for
computer security incident response;

using existing collaboration mechanisms to identify and mitigate
malicious intrusions or dissemination of malicious code that affect the

electronic networks of the Parties; and

promoting the development of a strong public and private workforce in
the area of cybersecurity.

9-7

CHAPTER 10
INVESTMENT FACILITATION

Article 10.1: UAE - Viet Nam Bilateral Investment Agreement

The Parties note the existence of the Agreement between the Government of the United
Arab Emirates and the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, signed at Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates on 16 February 2009 (“UAE - Viet Nam Bilateral Investment
Agreement’) and any subsequent amendments thereto, if any.

Article 10.2: Promotion of Investment

The Parties affirm their desire to promote an attractive investment climate and expand trade
in products and services. The Parties shall take appropriate measures to encourage and
facilitate the exchange of investments and to secure favourable conditions for long-term
economic development.

Article 10.3: Transparency
1. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, publish promptly and, except in emergency
situations, at the latest by the time of their entry into force, laws and regulations

affecting investment, and international investment agreements to which a Party is party.

2. To the extent possible, each Party shall make the laws, regulations and international
investment agreements of the kind referred to in paragraph | available on the internet.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to respond within a reasonable period of time to all requests
by the other Party for specific information on:

(a) laws, regulations or international investment agreements referred to in
paragraph 1; and

(b) new, or changes to existing, laws or regulations relating to investment.
Article 10.4: Investment Subcommittee
1. The Parties shall establish a United Arab Emirates — Viet Nam Investment
Subcommittee (Investment Subcommittee), which shall be composed of
representatives of both Parties. The Investment Subcommittee shall be co-chaired by

representatives of the Ministry of Finance of the United Arab Emirates and the Ministry
of Planning and Investment of Viet Nam

10-1

2. Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communications between the
Parties on any matter covered by this Chapter. Upon request of another Party, the
contact point shall:

(a) identify the office or official responsible for the relevant matter; and

(b) assist as necessary in facilitating communications with the requesting Party
with respect to that matter.

3. Any notification or communication under this Chapter shall be provided to the other
Party through the relevant contact points in the English language.

Article 10.5: Objectives of the Investment Subcommittee
The objectives of the Investment Subcommittee are as follows:

(a) To promote and enhance the economic cooperation between the Parties;

(b) To monitor investment relations, to identify opportunities for expanding
investment, and to identify issues relevant to investment that may be
appropriate for negotiation in an appropriate forum;

(c) To hold consultations on specific investment matters of interest to the Parties;

(d) To work toward the enhancement of investment flows;

(e) To promote, as far as possible, the dissemination of investment information,
including investment rules, regulations, policies and procedures;

(f) To the extent possible, to identify and work toward the removal of impediments
to investment flows; and

(g) To seek the views of the private sector, where appropriate, on matters related to
the work of the Investment Subcommittee.

Article 10.6: Role of the Investment Subcommittee

The Investment Subcommittee shall meet at such times and venues as agreed by the Parties.
A Party may refer a specific investment matter to the Investment Subcommittee by
delivering a written request to the other Party that includes a description of the matter
concerned. The Investment Subcommittee shall take up the matter promptly after the
request is delivered unless the requesting Party agrees to postpone discussion of the matter.
The Parties shall avail themselves of the opportunity to discuss and address the issue
amicably in the Investment Subcommittee, keeping in mind the objective of promoting and
facilitating trade and investment.

10-2

Article 10.7: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Chapter 17 (Dispute Settlement) shall not apply to any matter or dispute arising from this
Chapter.

10-3

CHAPTER 11
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT

Article 11.1: Objectives

The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation in the field of government
procurement and cooperate for the purposes of promoting greater transparency in the field
of government procurement in accordance with their respective laws and regulations.

Article 11.2: Scope

This Chapter shall apply to the laws, regulations, and procedures of a Party regarding
government procurement implemented by its central government procurement entities, as
defined or notified by that Party for the purposes of this Chapter.

Article 11.3: Areas of Cooperation

The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on matters relating to government procurement,
with a view to achieving a better understanding of each Party’s respective government

procurement systems. Such cooperation may include:

a) exchanging experience and non-confidential information, such as laws and
regulations and any significant modifications thereof;

b) sharing experience and information on the use of electronic means in
government procurement, and related matters; and

) sharing information, where possible, on best practices, including those in
relation to micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.

Article 11.4: Information on the Procurement System
1. Each Party shall make publicly available its laws, regulations and procedures regarding
government procurement, which may include information on where tender

opportunities and contract award notices are published.

2. To the extent possible and as appropriate, each Party shall endeavour to make available
and update the information referred to in paragraph | through electronic means.

3. Each Party shall specify in Annex 11A (Paper or Electronic Means Utilised by Parties

for the Publication of Information) the paper or electronic means utilised by that Party
to publish the information referred to in paragraph 1.

11-1

Article 11.5: Consultations

1.

3.

In the event of any disagreement related to the interpretation and application of this
Chapter, consultations shall be held on request of either Party.

A request for such consultations shall be submitted to the other Party’s contact point
established under Article 11.7 (Contact Points) of this Agreement. Unless the Parties
agree otherwise, they shall hold consultations within 60 days from the date of receipt
of the request.

Consultations can be conducted in the forms that are agreed by the Parties.

Article 11.6: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Any matter arising under this Chapter shall not be subject to the dispute settlement
mechanism provided for in Chapter 17 (Dispute Settlement) of this Agreement.

Article 11.7: Contact Points

1.

2.

Each Party shall designate a contact point in Annex 11B (Contact Points) to monitor
the implementation of this Chapter. The contact points shall work collaboratively to
facilitate the implementation of this Chapter.

The Parties shall notify each other of any change to their contact points.

Article 11.8: Review

The Parties may review this Chapter with a view to enhancing the level of transparency
and cooperation.

11-1

CHAPTER 12
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (IPR)

SECTION A: GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 12.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
Intellectual property embodies:

(a) copyright and related rights;

(b) patents and utility models;

(c) trademarks;

(d) industrial designs;

(e) layout-designs (topographies) of integrated circuits;

(f) geographical indications;

(g) plant varieties; and

(h) protection of undisclosed information.
National means, in respect of the relevant right, a person of a Party that would meet the
criteria for eligibility for protection provided for in the agreements listed in Article 12.5
(International Agreements) or the TRIPS Agreement.
Article 12.2: Objectives
The protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights should contribute to the
promotion of trade, investment, technological innovation and cultural industry, and to the
transfer and dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users

of technological knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic welfare,
and to a balance of rights and obligations.

12-1

Article 12.3: Principles

Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from adopting appropriate measures to
prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights by right holders or the resort to practices
that unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the international transfer of technology
provided that such measures are consistent with this Chapter.

Article 12.4: Nature and Scope of Obligations

Each Party shall give effect to the provisions of this Chapter. A Party may, but shall not be
obliged to, provide more extensive protection for, or enforcement of, intellectual property
rights under its law! than is required by this Chapter, provided that such protection or
enforcement does not contravene the provisions of this Chapter. Each Party shall be free
to determine the appropriate method of implementing the provisions of this Chapter within
its own legal system and practices.

Article 12.5: International Agreements
1. The Parties reaffirm their obligations set out in the following multilateral agreements:

(a) Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS
Agreement);

(b) Patent Cooperation Treaty of 19 June 1970, as revised by the Washington
Act of 2001;

(c) Paris Convention of 20 March 1883 for the Protection of Industrial
Property, as revised by the Stockholm Act of 1967 (Paris Convention);

(d) Berne Convention of 9 September 1886 for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works, as revised by the Paris Act of 1971 (Berne Convention);

(e) Madrid Protocol of 27 June 1989 relating to the Madrid Agreement
concerning the International Registration of Marks;

(f) WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty of 20 December 1996
(WPPT);

(g) Rome Convention of 26 October 1961 for the Protection of Performers,
Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations (Rome
Convention);

(h) WIPO Copyright Treaty of 20 December 1996 (WCT);

' For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Article, ‘law’ encompasses the legal system including
regulations, decrees and practices in a broad sense.

12-1

2.

(1) Budapest Treaty of 28 April 1977 on the International Recognition of the
Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure; and

(j) Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who
Are Blind, Visually Impaired or Otherwise Print Disabled (Marrakesh
Treaty).

A Party shall ratify or accede to the International Convention for the Protection of
New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) 1991, if it is not already party to that Convention.

Article 12.6: Intellectual Property and Public Health

1.

A Party may, in formulating or amending its laws and regulations, adopt measures
necessary to protect public health and nutrition, and to promote the public interest in
sectors of vital importance to their socio-economic and technological development,
provided that such measures are consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.

The Parties recognise the principles established in the Declaration on the TRIPS
Agreement and Public Health adopted on 14 November 2001 (Doha Declaration) by
the Ministerial Conference of the WTO and confirm that the provisions of this Chapter
are without prejudice to the Doha Declaration.

Article 12.7: National Treatment

1.

In respect of all categories of intellectual property covered in this Chapter, each Party
shall accord to nationals of the other Party treatment no less favourable than it accords
to its own nationals with regard to the protection of intellectual property rights in
accordance with Article 3(1) of the TRIPS Agreement.

A Party may derogate from paragraph 1 in relation to its judicial and administrative
procedures, including requiring a national of the other Party to designate an address
for service of process in its territory, or to appoint an agent in its territory, provided that
such derogation 1s:

(a) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations that are not
inconsistent with this Chapter; and

(b) not applied in a manner that would constitute a disguised restriction on
trade.

Paragraph 1 does not apply to procedures provided in multilateral agreements

concluded under the auspices of WIPO relating to the acquisition or maintenance of
intellectual property rights.

12-2

Article 12.8: Transparency

1.

Each Party shall, if applicable, subject to its legal system and practices, make
information concerning application and registration of trademarks, geographical
indications, industrial designs, patents and plant variety rights accessible to the general
public.

Each Party shall endeavour to make available such information in the English
language.

Article 12.9: Exhaustion of Intellectual Property Rights

Without prejudice to any provisions addressing the exhaustion of intellectual property
rights in the international agreements to which a Party is a member, nothing in this Chapter
shall prevent a Party from determining whether or under what conditions the exhaustion
of intellectual property rights applies under its legal system.

SECTION B: COOPERATION

Article 12.10: Cooperation Activities and Initiatives

1.

The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on the subject matters covered by this
Chapter, such as through appropriate coordination, training and exchange of
information between the respective intellectual property offices of the Parties, or other
institutions, as determined by each Party. Cooperation activities and initiatives
undertaken under this Chapter shall be subject to the availability of resources, and on
request, and on terms and conditions mutually agreed upon between the Parties.
Cooperation activities may cover areas such as:
(a) developments in domestic and international intellectual property policy;
(b) patent examination quality and efficiency;
(c) intellectual property administration and registration systems;
(d) education and awareness relating to intellectual property;
(e) intellectual property issues relevant to:
(1) micro, small and medium-sized enterprises;
(11) science, technology and innovation activities;

(ii1) the generation, transfer and dissemination of technology;

12-3

(iv) promoting the cultural industry; and
(v) empowering women and youth;

(f) policies involving the use of intellectual property for research, innovation
and economic growth;

(g) implementation of multilateral intellectual property agreements, such as
those concluded or administered under the auspices of WIPO;

(h) capacity-building;

(1) enforcement of intellectual property rights; and
(j) other activities and initiatives as may be mutually determined by the
Parties.

2. The Joint Committee established under Article 15.1 (Joint Committee) of Chapter 15
(Administration of the Agreement) may establish an Intellectual Property
Subcommittee in appropriate cases of mutual concerns.

SECTION C: TRADEMARKS

Article 12.11: Types of Signs Registrable as Trademarks

Neither Party shall require, as a condition of registration, that a sign be visually perceptible,
nor shall a Party deny registration of a trademark only on the ground that the sign of which
it is composed is a sound. Additionally, each Party shall make best efforts to register scent
marks. A Party may require a concise and accurate description, or graphical representation,
or both, as applicable, of the trademark.

Article 12.12: Collective and Certification Marks

Each Party shall provide that trademarks include collective marks and certification marks.
A Party is not obligated to treat certification marks as a separate category in its law,
provided that those marks are protected. Each Party shall also provide that signs that may
serve as geographical indications are capable of protection under its trademark system.”

? Consistent with the definition of a geographical indication in Article 12.24 (Protection of Geographical
Indications), any sign or combination of signs shall be eligible for protection under one or more of the legal
means for protecting geographical indications, or a combination of such means.

12-4

Article 12.13: Use of Identical or Similar Signs

Each Party shall provide that the owner of a registered trademark has the exclusive right
to prevent third parties that do not have the owner’s consent from using in the course of
trade identical or similar signs, including subsequent geographical indications,** for goods
or services that are related to those goods or services in respect of which the owner’s
trademark is registered, where such use would result in a likelihood of confusion. In the
case of the use of an identical sign for identical goods or services, a likelihood of confusion
shall be presumed.

Article 12.14: Exceptions

A Party may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark, such as fair
use of descriptive terms, provided that those exceptions take account of the legitimate
interest of the owner of the trademark and of third parties.

Article 12.15: Well-Known Trademarks

1. Neither Party shall require as a condition for determining that a trademark is well-
known that the trademark has been registered in the Party or in another jurisdiction,
included on a list of well-known trademarks, or given prior recognition as a well-
known trademark.

2. Article 6bis of the Paris Convention shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to goods or services
that are not identical or similar to those identified by a well-known trademark,” whether
registered or not, provided that use of that trademark in relation to those goods or
services would indicate a connection between those goods or services and the owner
of the trademark, and provided that the interests of the owner of the trademark are
likely to be damaged by such use.

3. Each Party recognises the importance of the Joint Recommendation Concerning
Provisions on the Protection of Well-Known Marks as adopted by the Assembly of the
Paris Union for the Protection of Industrial Property and the General Assembly of
WIPO at the Thirty-Fourth Series of Meetings of the Assemblies of the Member States
of WIPO September 20 to 29, 1999.

4. Each Party shall provide for appropriate measures to refuse the application or cancel
the registration and prohibit the use of a trademark that is identical or similar to a well-

> For greater certainty, the exclusive right in this Article applies to cases of unauthorised use of geographical
indications with goods for which the trademark is registered, in cases in which the use of that geographical
indication in the course of trade would result in a likelihood of confusion as to the source of the goods.

“For greater certainty, the Parties understand that this Article should not be interpreted to affect their rights
and obligations under Articles 22 and 23 of the TRIPS Agreement.

> In determining whether a trademark is well-known in a Party, that Party need not require that the reputation
of the trademark extend beyond the sector of the public that normally deals with the relevant goods or
services.

12-5

known trademark®, for identical or similar goods or services, if the use of that
trademark is likely to cause confusion with the prior well-known trademark. A Party
may also provide such measures including in cases in which the subsequent trademark
is likely to deceive.

Article 12.16: Procedural Aspects of Examination, Opposition and Cancellation or
Termination’

Each Party shall provide a system for the examination and registration of trademarks which
includes, inter alia:

(a) communicating to the applicant in writing, which may be by electronic
means, the reasons for any refusal to register a trademark;

(b) providing the applicant with an opportunity to respond to communications
from the competent authorities, to contest any initial refusal, and to make a
judicial appeal of any final refusal to register a trademark;

(c) providing an opportunity to oppose the registration of a trademark or to
seek cancellation or termination of a trademark; and

(d) requiring administrative decisions in opposition and cancellation
proceedings to be reasoned and in writing, which may be provided by
electronic means.

Article 12.17: Electronic Trademarks System
Each Party shall provide:

(a) a system for the electronic application for, and maintenance of,
trademarks; and

(b) a publicly available electronic information system, including an online
database, of trademark applications and of registered trademarks.

Article 12.18: Classification of Goods and Services

Each Party shall adopt or maintain a trademark classification system that is consistent with
the Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for
the Purposes of the Registration of Marks, done at Nice, June 15, 1957, as revised and
amended (Nice Classification). Each Party shall provide that:

° The Parties understand that a well-known trademark is one that was already well-known before, as
determined by a Party, the application for, registration of or use of the first-mentioned trademark.

Tn this Chapter, the term ‘Termination’ is equivalent to ‘invalidation’, which has retroactive effect.

12-6

(a)

(b)

registrations and the publications of applications indicate the goods and
services by their names, grouped according to the classes established by the
Nice Classification;® and

goods or services may not be considered as being similar to each other on
the ground that, in any registration or publication, they are classified in the
same class of the Nice Classification. Conversely, each Party shall provide
that goods or services may not be considered as being dissimilar from each
other on the ground that, in any registration or publication, they are
classified in different classes of the Nice Classification.

Article 12.19: Terms of Protection for Trademarks

Each Party shall provide that initial registration and each renewal of registration of a
trademark shall be for a term of no less than 10 years.

Article 12.20: Non-Recordal of a License

Neither Party shall require recordal of trademark licenses:

(a)
(b)

to establish the validity of the license; nor

as a condition for use of a trademark by a licensee to be deemed to constitute
use by the holder in a proceeding that relates to the acquisition, maintenance
or enforcement of trademarks.

Article 12.21: Domain Names

In connection with each Party’s system for the management of its country-code top-level
domain (ccTLD) domain names, the following shall be available:

(a)

an appropriate procedure for the settlement of disputes, based on, or
modelled along the same lines as, the principles established in the Uniform
Domain-Name Dispute-Resolution Policy, as approved by the Internet
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) or that:

(1) is designed to resolve disputes expeditiously and at low cost;

(11) is fair and equitable;

(iii) — is not overly burdensome; and

(iv) does not preclude resort to judicial proceedings;

8 A Party that relies on translations of the Nice Classification shall follow updated versions of the Nice
Classification to the extent that official translations have been issued and published.

12-7

(b) online public access to a reliable and accurate database of contact
information concerning domain name registrants,

in accordance with each Party’s law and, if applicable, relevant administrator policies
regarding the protection of privacy and personal data.

SECTION D: COUNTRY NAMES

Article 12.22: Country Names

Each Party shall provide the legal means for interested persons to prevent commercial use
of the country name of a Party in relation to a good in a manner that misleads consumers
as to the origin of that good.

SECTION E: GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS

Article 12.23: Protection? of Geographical Indications

1. Geographical indication means an indication that identifies a good as originating in the
territory of a Party, or a region or locality in that territory, where a given quality,
reputation or other characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to its
geographical origin.

2. The Parties reaffirm that geographical indications may be protected through a
trademark or sui generis system or other legal means.

Article 12.24: System of Registration and Protection of Geographical Indications

1. Each Party shall maintain a system for the registration and protection of geographical
indications which shall contain at least the following elements:

(a) a register listing geographical indications protected in the territory of that
Party;

(b) an administrative process verifying that geographical indications to be
entered, or maintained on the register referred to in subparagraph (a)
identify a good as originating in a territory, region or locality of a Party,

° For greater certainty, protection of Geographical Indications collectively means protection by registration
or recognition.

12-8

where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the good is
essentially attributable to its geographical origin;

(c) an opposition procedure that allows the legitimate interests of any natural
or legal person to be taken into account; and

(d) procedures for rectification and removal or termination of the effects of the
entries on the register referred to in subparagraph (a) that take into account
the legitimate interests of third parties and the right holders of the registered
geographical indications in question!”.

2. Each Party may provide in its domestic legislation more extensive protection than is
required by this Section, provided that such protection does not contravene the
protection provided under this Chapter.

Article 12.25: Data of Protection of a Geographical Indication

If a Party grants protection to a geographical indication, the protection shall commence no
earlier than the filing date'! or the registration date in either of Parties according to the
national laws and regulations of each Party.

SECTION F: PATENT AND INDUSTRIAL DESIGN

Article 12.26: Grace Period for Patent

Each Party shall disregard information contained in public disclosure of an invention
related to an application to register a patent!” if the public disclosure:

(a) was made by the inventor, applicant or a person that obtained the
information from the inventor or applicant inside or outside the territory of
each Party; and

(b) occurred within at least 12 months prior to the date of filing of the
application or priority date as applicable.

'0 Without prejudice to its domestic legislation on the system of registration and protection of geographical
indications, each Party shall provide for legal means for the invalidation of the registration of geographical
indications.

'! For greater certainty, the filing date referred to in this Article includes, as applicable, the priority filing
date under the Paris Convention.

'? For greater certainty, patent may include utility model in accordance with national laws and regulations.

12-9

Article 12.27: Procedural Aspects of Examination, Opposition, Cancellation and
Termination of Certain Registered Patent and Industrial Design

Each Party shall provide a system for the examination and registration of patents or
industrial designs which includes, inter alia:

(a) communicating to the applicant in writing, which may be by electronic
means, the reasons for any refusal to register patent or industrial design;

(b) providing the applicant with an opportunity to respond to communications
from the competent authorities, to contest any initial refusal, and to make a
judicial appeal of any final refusal to register patent or industrial design;

(c) providing an opportunity for interested parties to seek cancellation or
termination of a registered patent or industrial design, and in addition may
provide an opportunity for interested parties to oppose the registration of
patent or industrial design; and

(d) making decisions in opposition, cancellation, or termination proceedings to
be reasoned and in writing, which may be delivered by electronic means.

Article 12.28: Amendments, Corrections, and Observations

1. Each Party shall provide an applicant for patent or industrial design with at least one
opportunity to make amendments, corrections or observations from a third party in
connection with its application.

2. Each Party shall provide a right holder of patent or industrial design with
opportunities to make amendments or corrections after registration provided that such
amendments or corrections do not change or expand the scope of the patent or
industrial design right as a whole."

Article 12.29: Industrial Design Protection

The duration of protection available for registered industrial designs shall amount to at
least 15 years according to the domestic law and regulations from the date of filing.

Article 12.30: Exceptions

A Party may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent or an
industrial design, provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with a normal
exploitation of the patent or an industrial design and do not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the right holder, taking account of the legitimate interests of third
parties.

'3 Tt is understood that the amendments or corrections which do not change or expand the scope of the right
means that the scope of the patent or industrial design right stays same as before or reduced.

12-10

SECTION H: COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS

Article 12.31: General Provision

Without prejudice to the obligations set out in the international agreements to which
both Parties are party, each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations",
grant and ensure adequate and effective protection to the authors of works and to
performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organisations for their works,

performances, phonograms, and broadcasts, respectively.

Each Party shall ensure that a broadcasting organisation has at least the exclusive right
of authorising the following acts: broadcast or re-broadcast their broadcasts; directly
or indirectly reproduce the entire or part of the fixation of their broadcasts using any
means or form only for broadcast purpose; distribution of the fixation.

Article 12.32: Term of Protection for Copyright and Related Rights

Each Party shall provide that in cases in which the term of protection of a work,
performance or phonogram 1s to be calculated:

(a) on the basis of the life of a natural person, the term shall be not less than
the life of the author and 50 years after the author’s death;

(b) the term of protection to be granted to performers under this Chapter shall
last, at least, until the end of a period of 50 years computed from the end of
the year in which the performance was fixed; and

(c) the term of protection to be granted to producers of phonograms under this
Chapter shall last, at least, until the end of a period of 50 years computed
from the end of the year in which the phonogram was published, or failing
such publication within 50 years from fixation of the phonogram, 50 years
from the end of the year in which the fixation was made.

Article 12.33: Limitations and Exceptions

1.

With respect to this Section, each Party shall confine limitations or exceptions to
exclusive rights to certain special cases that do not conflict with a normal exploitation
of the work, performance or phonogram, and do not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the right holder.

‘4 For greater certainty, for the purposes of this subparagraph, ‘laws and regulations’ is understood to

encompass national laws, regulations, decrees, ministerial decisions (circular), and practices in a broad sense.

12-11

2. This Article does not reduce or extend the scope of applicability of the limitations and
exceptions permitted by the TRIPS Agreement, the Berne Convention, the WCT or the
WPPT or the Marrakesh Treaty.

3. Each Party may, in its national legislation, provide for the same kinds of limitations or
exceptions with regard to the protection of performers for performance and
phonograms, to the protection of producers of phonograms and of broadcasting
organisations as it provides for, in its national legislation, in connection with the
protection of copyright in literary and artistic works.

4. Each Party shall endeavour to achieve an appropriate balance in its copyright and
related rights system, among other things by means of limitations or exceptions that
are consistent with paragraph 1, 2 and 3, including those for the digital environment,
giving due consideration to legitimate purposes such as, but not limited to: criticism;
comment; news reporting; teaching, scholarship, research; and facilitating access to
published works for persons who are blind, visually impaired or otherwise print
disabled.!> !¢

Article 12.34: Contractual Transfers

Each Party shall provide that for copyright and related rights, any person acquiring or
holding any economic right!’ in a work, performance or phonogram:

(a) may freely and separately transfer that right by contract; and

(b) by virtue of contract!®, including contracts of employment underlying the
creation of works, performances or phonograms, shall be able to exercise
that right in that person’s own name!’ and enjoy fully the benefits derived
from that right.”°

Article 12.35: Obligations concerning Rights Management Information

1. Each Party shall provide adequate and effective legal remedies against any person who
knowingly, without authorisation removes or alters any electronic rights management
information and/or distributes, imports for distribution, broadcasts or communicates to

'S As recognised by the Marrakesh Treaty.

'6 For greater certainty, a use that has commercial aspects may in appropriate circumstances be considered
to have a legitimate purpose under Article 12.33 (Limitations and Exceptions).

'” For greater certainty, this provision does not affect the exercise of moral rights.

'8 For greater certainty, ‘contract’? encompasses contracts of employment underlying the creation or works,
performances, or phonograms.

'9 For greater certainty, ‘person’s own name’ means ‘right holder’s name’.

20 Nothing in this Article affects a Party’s ability to establish: (i) which specific contracts underlying the
creation of works, performances or phonograms shall, in the absence of a written agreement, result in a
transfer of economic rights by operation of law; and (ii) reasonable limits to protect the interests of the
original right holders, taking into account the legitimate interests of the transferees.

12-12

the public, without authority, works or copies of works knowing that electronic rights
management information has been removed or altered without authority.

2. For the purposes of this Article, the expression “rights-management information”
means any information provided by a right holder that identifies the work’! or other
subject matter that is the object of protection under this Chapter, the author or any other
right holder, or information about the conditions of use of the work or other subject
matter, and any numbers or codes that represent such information. Paragraph | shall
apply when any of these items of information is associated with a copy of, or appears
in connection with the communication to the public of, a work or other subject matter
that is the object of protection under this Chapter.

Article 12.36: Collective Management

The Parties recognise the important role of collective management societies for copyright
and related rights in collecting and distributing royalties based on practices that are fair,
efficient, transparent and accountable, which may include appropriate record keeping and
reporting mechanisms.

SECTION I: ENFORCEMENT

Article 12.37: General Obligations in Enforcement

Each Party shall ensure that enforcement procedures as specified in this Section are
available under its law so as to permit effective action against any act of infringement of
intellectual property rights covered by this Chapter, including expeditious remedies to
prevent infringements and remedies that constitute a deterrent to future infringements.
These procedures shall be applied in such a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to
legitimate trade and to provide for safeguards against their abuse.

Article 12.38: Border Measures

1. Each Party shall, in conformity with its domestic laws and regulations and the
provisions of Part III, Section 4 of the TRIPS Agreement adopt or maintain procedures
to enable a right holder, who has valid grounds for suspecting that the importations of
counterfeit trademark or pirated copyright goods may take place, to lodge an
application in writing with the competent authorities, in the Party in which the border
measure procedures are applied, for the suspension by that Party's customs authorities
of the release into free circulation of such goods.

2. A Party may enable such an application to be made in respect of goods which involve
other infringements of intellectual property rights, provided that the requirements of

*! For the greater certainty, ‘work’ is interpreted as defined in the Bern Convention Art. 2.1.

12-13

Part III, Section 4 of the TRIPS Agreement are met. A Party may also provide for
corresponding procedures concerning the suspension by the customs authorities of the
release of infringing goods destined for exportation from their territory in accordance
with its domestic laws and regulations.

12-14

CHAPTER 13
ECONOMIC COOPERATION

Article 13.1: Objectives

1.

The Parties shall undertake to promote cooperation under this Agreement for their
mutual benefit in order to liberalise and facilitate trade and investment between the
Parties and foster economic growth.

Economic cooperation under this Chapter shall be built upon a common
understanding between the Parties to support the implementation of this
Agreement, with the objective of maximising its benefits, and supporting pathways
to trade and investment facilitation in order to contribute to the sustainable and
inclusive economic growth, development and prosperity of the Parties.

Article 13.2: Scope

1.

Economic cooperation under this Chapter shall support the effective and efficient
implementation and utilisation of this Agreement through activities that relate to
trade and investment.

Economic cooperation under this Chapter shall initially focus on the following
areas:

(a) manufacturing industries;

(b) infrastructure and logistics;

(c) tourism;

(d) transport;

(e) shipping and maritime;

(f) trade and investment promotion;

(g) digital trade;

(h) precious metals, including gems and diamonds;
(1) petrochemicals;

(j) energy development (including renewable energies such as wind power,
solar power, oil and gas extraction and processing);

(k) trade-related aspects of agriculture, fisheries, livestock and forestry;

13-1

(1) financial services;
(m) innovation and digital transformation;
(n) micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs); and

(0) other areas identified under specific Chapters of this Agreement, and
other areas of mutual interest related to this Agreement.

3. The Parties may agree in the Annual Work Programme on Economic Cooperation

Activities (“Annual Work Programme’) to modify the above list, including by
adding other areas for economic cooperation.

Article 13.3: Competition Policy

1.

The Parties recognise the importance of free and undistorted competition in their
trade relations. The Parties may cooperate to exchange information relating to the
development of competition laws and policy, through their respective competition
authorities and subject to domestic laws, regulations and available resources of each
Party.

To address specific matters relating to anti-competitive practices affecting trade
relations and the benefits under this Agreement, on request of either Party, the
requested Party may enter into consultations with the requesting Party, through
their respective competition authorities, subject to the respective domestic laws and
regulations and available resources of each Party. The consultations shall be
without prejudice to the autonomy of each Party to develop, maintain and enforce
its domestic competition laws and regulations.

Article 13.4: Resources

Recognising the different level of development of the Parties, both Parties shall
work to provide resources for cooperation and capacity building activities
conducted under this Chapter in accordance with the laws, regulations and available
resources of each Party.

The Parties, on the basis of mutual benefit and agreement, may consider
cooperation with, and contributions from, external parties, in accordance with each
Party’s laws and regulations, to support the implementation of the Annual Work
Programme.

Article 13.5: Means of Cooperation

The Parties, in accordance with their laws and regulations, shall cooperate in the
following ways:

(a) joint organisation of conferences, seminars, workshops, meetings,
training sessions, and outreach and education programs;

(b)

(f)

exchange of delegations, professionals, technicians and specialists from
the academic sector, institutions dedicated to research, private sector,
and governmental agencies, including study visits and internship
programs for professional training;

dialogue and exchange of experiences between the Parties’ private
sector and agencies involved in trade promotion;

initiation of the knowledge-sharing platform aiming to transfer
experience and best practices in the field of government development
and modernisation to other countries through the UAE’s Government
Experience Exchange Programme.

promote joint business initiatives between entrepreneurs of the Parties;
and

any other form of cooperation that may be agreed by the Parties.

Article 13.6: Subcommittee on Economic Cooperation and MSMEs

1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and operation of this Chapter, the
Parties hereby establish a Subcommittee on Economic Cooperation and MSMEs
(“Subcommittee on Economic Cooperation and MSMEs’’).

2. The Subcommittee on Economic Cooperation and MSMEs shall undertake the
following functions:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

(c)

(f)

monitor and review the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

identify new opportunities and ways to assist MSMEs of the Parties to
take advantage of the commercial opportunities under this Agreement,
and agree on new ideas for prospective cooperation or capacity building
activities;

formulate and develop Annual Work Programme proposals and their
implementation mechanisms;

coordinate, monitor, and review progress of the Annual Work
Programme to assess its overall effectiveness and contribution to the
implementation and operation of this Chapter and Chapter 14 (Micro,
Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises);

suggest amendments to the Annual Work Programme and
implementation mechanism through periodic evaluations;

consider any other matters pertaining to MSMEs, as appropriate and as
agreed by Parties, including any issues raised by MSMEs regarding
their ability to benefit from this Agreement;

(g) initiate and undertake collaboration, as appropriate, to enhance general
coordination, cooperation and capacity building activities;

(h) invite, as appropriate, international institutions, private sector entities,
and other relevant institutions, to assist in the development and implementation
of cooperation and capacity building activities;

(1) cooperate with other Subcommittees and/or subsidiary bodies
established, as appropriate, under this Agreement in support of the development
and implementation of cooperation and capacity building activities; and

(j) report to and, if deemed necessary, consult with the Joint Committee in
relation to the implementation and operation of this Chapter.

3. The Subcommittee on Economic Cooperation and MSMEs shall convene within

one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and thereafter meet
annually, unless the Parties decide otherwise.

Article 13.7: Annual Work Programme

1.

The Subcommittee on Economic Cooperation and MSMEs shall adopt an Annual
Work Programme, on a mutually agreed basis, based on proposals submitted by the
Parties.

Each activity in an Annual Work Programme developed under this Chapter shall:

(a) be guided by the objectives agreed in Article 13.1 (Objectives);

(b) be related to trade or investment and support the implementation of this
Agreement and enhancing its benefits;
medium-sized
(c) involve both Parties;
(d) address the mutual or agreed priorities of the Parties;
(e) and avoid duplicating existing economic cooperation activities.

Article 13.8: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 17 (Dispute
Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.

CHAPTER 14
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM-Sized ENTERPRISES

Article 14.1: General Principles

1.

The Parties, recognising the fundamental role of micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises (MSMEs) in maintaining the dynamism and enhancing the
competitiveness of their respective economies, shall foster close cooperation
between MSMEs of the Parties and cooperate in promoting jobs and growth in
MSMEs.

The Parties recognise the integral role of the private sector in the MSME cooperation
to be implemented under this Chapter.

. For the purposes of this Chapter, MSMEs means micro, small and medium-sized

enterprises and may be further defined, where applicable, according to the respective
laws, regulations, or national policies of each Party.

Article 14.2: Cooperation to Increase Trade and Investment Opportunities for
MSMEs

The Parties shall strengthen their cooperation under this Chapter, which may include:

(a) encouraging efficient and effective implementation of facilitative and
transparent trade rules and regulations;

(b) improving MSMEs’ access to markets and participation in global value
chains, including by promoting and facilitating partnerships among
businesses;

(c) promoting the use of electronic commerce by MSMEs;

(d) exploring opportunities for exchanges of experiences among Parties’
entrepreneurial programmes;

(e) encouraging innovation and use of technology;

(f) promoting awareness, understanding, and effective use of the intellectual
property system among MSMEs;

(g) promoting good regulatory practices and building capacity in formulating

regulations, policies, and programmes that contribute to MSMEs’
development; and

14-1

(h) sharing best practices on enhancing the capability and competitiveness of
MSMEs.

Article 14.3: Information Sharing

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain its own free, publicly accessible website
containing information regarding this Agreement, including:

(a) the text of this Agreement;
(b) a summary of this Agreement; and

(c) any additional information that would be useful for MSMEs interested in
benefitting from the opportunities provided by this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall include in its website links to:
(a) the equivalent websites of the other Party; and
(b) the websites of its own government agencies and other appropriate entities
that provide information the Party considers useful to any person interested
in trading, investing, or doing business in that Party’s territory.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to regularly review the information and links on the
website referred to in paragraphs | and 2 to ensure the information and links are
accurate.

4. To the extent possible, each Party shall endeavour to make the information identified
in this Article available in English. If this information is available in another
authentic language of this Agreement, the Party shall endeavour to make this
information available in English, as appropriate.

Article 14.4: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 17 (Dispute Settlement)
for any matter arising under this Chapter.

14-2

CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATION OF THE AGREEMENT

Article 15.1: Joint Committee

1.

2.

7.

8.

The Parties hereby establish a Joint Committee.

The Joint Committee shall be composed of relevant government officials of each
Party and shall be co-chaired by senior officials of the Parties.

. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Joint Committee shall meet within one year

from the entry into force of this Agreement and every two years thereafter, to
consider any matter relating to this Agreement. The regular sessions of the Joint
Committee shall be held alternately in the territories of the Parties.

. The Joint Committee shall promptly hold special sessions from the date of a request

thereof from either Party, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

. All decisions of the Joint Committee shall be taken by mutual agreement.

. The functions of the Joint Committee shall be as follows:

(a) to review and monitor the implementation and operation of this
Agreement;

(b) to supervise and coordinate the work of all committees, subcommittees
and working groups established under this Agreement;

(c) if requested by either Party, to propose mutually agreed interpretation
to the provisions of this Agreement to be adopted by the Parties;

(d) to adopt decisions or make recommendations as envisaged by this
Agreement; and

(e) to carry out any other functions as may be agreed by the Parties.
The Joint Committee may:

(a) establish standing or ad hoc subcommittees or working groups and
assign any of its powers thereto;

(b) consider and recommend to the Parties amendments to this Agreement.

The Joint Committee shall establish its own rules of working procedures.

9. Meetings of the Joint Committee and of any standing or ad hoc subcommittees or
working groups may be conducted in person or by any other means as determined
by the Parties.

Article 15.2: Contact Points

1. Each Party shall designate a contact point to receive and facilitate official
communications between the Parties on any matter relating to this Agreement.

2. All official communications in relation to this Agreement shall be in the English
language.

CHAPTER 16
EXCEPTIONS

Article 16.1: General Exceptions

1. For the purposes of Chapters 2 (Trade in Goods), 3 (Rules of Origin), 4 (Customs Procedures
and Trade Facilitation), 6 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), 7 (Technical Barriers to
Trade), and 9 (Digital Trade), Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative note are
incorporated into and form part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. For the purposes of Chapters 8 (Trade in Services) and 9 (Digital Trade), Article XIV of the
GATS, including its footnotes, is incorporated into and forms part of this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis.

Article 16.2: Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a) to require any Party to furnish any information, the disclosure of which it considers
contrary to its essential security interests; or

(b) to prevent any Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for the
protection of its essential security interests:

(1) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials from
which they are derived;

(ii) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to
such traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on directly or

indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military establishment;

(111) relating to the supply of services as carried out directly or indirectly for
the purpose of provisioning a military establishment;

(iv) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or
(c) to prevent any Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations under

the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

16-1

Article 16.3: Taxation
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall apply to any taxation measure.!

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of any Party under any tax
convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any such tax
convention, that tax convention shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

' For the avoidance of doubt, provisions where corresponding rights and obligations are also granted or imposed
under the WTO Agreement shall apply to taxation measures.

16-2

CHAPTER 17
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Article 17.1: Objective

The objective of this Chapter is to establish an effective and efficient mechanism for
avoiding and settling disputes between the Parties concerning the interpretation and
application of this Agreement with a view to reaching, where possible, a mutually
agreed solution.

Article 17.2: Cooperation

The Parties shall endeavour to agree on the interpretation and application of this
Agreement, and shall make every attempt through cooperation to arrive at a mutually
satisfactory resolution of any matter that might affect its operation.

Article 17.3: Scope of Application

1.

Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply with
respect to the settlement of any dispute between the Parties concerning the
interpretation, or application of this Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “covered
provisions’’), wherever a Party considers that:

(a) a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with its obligations under
this Agreement; or

(b) the other Party otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under this
Agreement.

This Chapter shall not cover non-violation complaints and other situation
complaints.

Article 17.4: Contact Points

1.

Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communications between the
Parties with respect to any dispute initiated under this Chapter.

Any request, notification, written submission or other document made in
accordance with this Chapter shall be delivered to the other Party through its
designated contact point.

Article 17.5: Request for Information

Before a request for consultations, good offices, conciliation or mediation is made pursuant to
Articles 17.6 (Consultations) or 17.7 (Good Offices, Conciliation or Mediation) respectively,
a Party may request in writing any relevant information with respect to a measure at issue. The
Party to which that request is made shall make all efforts to provide the requested information
in a written response to be submitted no later than 20 days after the date of receipt of the
request.

Article 17.6: Consultations

1.

The Parties shall endeavour to resolve any dispute referred to in Article 17.3 (Scope of
Application) by entering into consultations in good faith with the aim of reaching a
mutually agreed solution.

A Party shall seek consultations by means of a written request delivered to the other Party
identifying the reasons for the request, including the measure at issue and a description of
its factual basis and the legal basis specifying the covered provisions that it considers
applicable.

The Party to which the request for consultations is made shall reply to the request promptly,
but no later than 10 days after the date of receipt of the request. Consultations shall be held
within 30 days of the date of receipt of the request. The consultations shall be deemed to
be concluded within 45 days of the date of receipt of the request, unless the Parties agree
otherwise.

Consultations on matters of urgency including those which concern perishable goods, shall
be held within 15 days of the date of receipt of the request. The consultations shall be
deemed to be concluded within those 20 days unless the Parties agree otherwise.

During consultations each Party shall provide sufficient information so as to allow a
complete examination of the measure at issue including how that measure is affecting the
operation and application of this Agreement.

Consultations, including all information disclosed and positions taken by the Parties during
consultations, shall be confidential, and without prejudice to the rights of either Party in
any further proceedings.

Consultations may be held in person or by any other means of communication agreed by
the Parties. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, consultations, if held in person, shall take
place in the territory of the Party to which the request is made.

If the Party to which the request is made does not respond to the request for consultations
within 10 days of the date of its receipt, or if consultations are not held within the
timeframes laid down in paragraph 3 or in paragraph 4 respectively, or if the Parties agree
not to have consultations, or if consultations have been concluded and no mutually agreed

solution has been reached, the Party that sought consultations may have recourse to Article
17.8 (Establishment of a Panel).

Article 17.7: Good Offices, Conciliation or Mediation

1.

The Parties may at any time agree to undertake good offices, conciliation or mediation.
They may begin at any time, and be terminated by either Party at any time.

Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation or mediation and the particular positions
taken by the Parties in these proceedings, shall be confidential and without prejudice to the
rights of either Party in any further proceedings under this Chapter or any other
proceedings.

If the Parties agree, procedures for good offices, conciliation or mediation may continue
while the panel procedures proceed.

Article 17.8: Establishment of a Panel

I.

The complaining Party may request the establishment of a panel if:

(a) the respondent Party does not reply to the request in accordance with the time
frames referred to in Article 17.6 (Consultations); or

(b) the consultations referred to in Article 17.6 (Consultations) are not held or fail
to settle a dispute within 45 days or 20 days in relation to urgent matters
including those which concern perishable goods after the date of the receipt of
the request for consultations by the respondent Party.

The request for the establishment of a panel shall be made by means of a written request
delivered to the other Party and shall identify the measure at issue and indicate the factual
basis of the complaint and the legal basis specifying the relevant covered provisions in a
manner sufficient to present how such measure is inconsistent with those provisions.

When a request is made by the complaining Party in accordance with paragraph 1, a panel
shall be established.

Article 17.9: Composition of a Panel

1,

The Parties shall apply the following procedures in establishing a panel:
(a) the panel shall comprise three panellists, unless the Parties agree otherwise;

(b) within 30 days after the date of receipt of the request for the establishment of
the panel, each Party shall notify the other Party of its appointment of a panellist
and propose up to four candidates, who are not nationals of either Party and do
not have their usual place of residence in either Party, to serve as the chairperson
of the panel. If a Party fails to appoint a panellist within this time, the panellist

shall be appointed by the other Party from the candidates proposed for the
chairperson by the Party that failed to appoint a panellist, if such a list exists or,
in the absence of such a list, from the other Party's proposed candidates;

(c) the Parties shall endeavour to agree on a third panellist who shall serve as
chairperson from among the candidates proposed, within 15 days from the date
the second panellist has been appointed or selected. If the Parties fail to decide
on a chairperson within this time period, within a further seven days, the
chairperson shall be appointed after selection by lot, from the candidates
proposed, in the presence of representatives of both Parties.

2. The date of establishment of the panel shall be the date upon which the chairperson is
appointed.

3. If a panellist appointed by a Party withdraws, is removed or becomes unable to serve, a
replacement shall be appointed by that Party within 30 days and, in cases of urgency, within
15 days, failing which the replacement shall be appointed by the other Party from the
candidates proposed for the chairperson in accordance with the second sentence of
subparagraph 1(b).

4. If the chairperson of the panel withdraws, is removed or becomes unable to serve, the
Parties shall endeavour to decide on the appointment of a replacement within 30 days and,
in cases of urgency, within 15 days, failing which the replacement shall be appointed in
accordance with subparagraph 1(c).

5. If an appointment in paragraph 3 or paragraph 4 would require selecting from the list of
candidates proposed for chairperson and there are no remaining candidates, each Party shall
propose up to three additional candidates within 30 days and, within a further seven days
the panellist or the chairperson shall be appointed after selection by lot, from the candidates
proposed, in the presence of representatives of both Parties.

Article 17.10: Decision on Urgency

If a Party so requests, the panel shall give a preliminary ruling, within 15 days of its
composition, as to whether the dispute concerns matters of urgency.

Article 17.11: Requirements for Panellists
1. Each panellist shall:
(a) have demonstrated expertise in law, international trade, and other matters
covered by this Agreement or in the resolution of disputes arising under

international trade agreements;

(b) be independent of, and not be affiliated with or take instructions from, either
Party;

(c)

(d)

(e)

serve in their individual capacities and not take instructions from any
organisation or government with regard to matters related to the dispute;

comply with the Code of Conduct established in Annex 17B (Code of Conduct);
and

be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity, impartiality, reliability, and sound
judgment.

2. The chairperson shall also have experience in dispute settlement procedures.

3. Persons who provided good offices, conciliation or mediation to the Parties, pursuant to
Article 17.7 (Good Offices, Conciliation or Mediation) in relation to the same or a
substantially equivalent matter, shall not be eligible to be appointed as panellists in that

matter.

Article 17.12: Replacement of Panellists

If any of the panellists of the original panel becomes unable to act, withdraws or needs to be
replaced because that panellist does not comply with the requirements of the code of conduct,
a successor panellist shall be appointed in the same manner as prescribed for the appointment
of the original panellist under Article 17.9 (Composition of a Panel) and the work of the panel
shall be suspended during the appointment of the successor panellist.

Article 17.13: Functions of the Panel

Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the panel:

(a)

(b)

(c)

shall make an objective assessment of the matter before it, including an
objective assessment of the facts of the case and the applicability of and
conformity of the measure at issue with the covered provisions;

shall set out, in its decisions and reports, the findings of fact and law and the
rationale behind any findings and conclusions that it makes; and

should consult regularly with the Parties and provide adequate opportunities for
the development of a mutually agreed solution.

Article 17.14: Terms of Reference

1. Unless the Parties otherwise agree within 15 days after the date of establishment of the
panel, the terms of reference of the panel shall be:

“to examine, in the light of the relevant covered provisions of this Agreement cited by
the Parties, the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of the panel, to
make findings as to the conformity of the measure at issue with the relevant covered
provisions of this Agreement as well as recommendations, if any, on the means to

2.

resolve the dispute, and to deliver a report in accordance with Articles 17.18 (Interim
Report) and 17.19 (Final Report)”.

If the Parties agree on other terms of reference than those referred to in paragraph | within
the timeline specified therein, they shall notify the agreed terms of reference to the panel
no later than five days after their agreement.

Article 17.15: Rules of Interpretation

1.

The panel shall interpret the covered provisions in accordance with customary rules of
interpretation of public international law.

When appropriate, the panel may also take into account relevant interpretations in reports
of panels established under this Agreement and reports of panels and the Appellate Body
adopted by the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO.

The rulings of the panel cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations of the Parties
provided for under this Agreement.

Article 17.16: Procedures of the Panel

1.

Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the panel shall follow the Rules of Procedure set out in
Annex 17A (Rules of Procedure for the Panel).

There shall be no ex parte communications with the panel concerning matters under its
consideration.

The deliberations of the panel and the documents submitted to it shall be kept confidential.

. A Party asserting that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with the provisions of

this Agreement shall have the burden of establishing such inconsistency. A Party asserting
that a measure is subject to an exception under this Agreement shall have the burden of
establishing that the exception applies.

The panel should consult with the Parties as appropriate and provide adequate opportunities
for the development of a mutually agreed solution.

The panel shall make its decisions, including its reports by consensus, but if consensus is
not possible then by majority vote. Any panellist may furnish separate opinions on matters

not unanimously agreed, and such separate opinions shall not be disclosed.

Rulings of the panel shall be binding on the Parties.

Article 17.17: Receipt of Information

1.

On request of a Party, or on its own initiative, the panel may seek from the Parties
relevant information it considers necessary and appropriate. The Parties shall
respond promptly and fully to any request by the panel for information.

On request of a Party or on its own initiative, the panel may seek from any source
any information it considers appropriate.

On request of a Party, or on its own initiative, the panel may seek technical advice
or expert opinion from any individual or body that it deems appropriate, and subject
to any terms and conditions as the Parties agree.

Any information obtained by the panel under this Article shall be made available
to the Parties and the Parties may provide comments on that information.

Article 17.18: Interim Report

1.

The panel shall deliver an interim report to the Parties within 90 days after the date
of composition of the panel. When the panel considers that this deadline cannot be
met, the chairperson of the panel shall notify the Parties in writing, stating the
reasons for the delay and the date on which the panel plans to deliver its interim
report. Under no circumstances shall the delay exceed 30 days after the deadline.
The interim report shall not be made public.

The interim report shall set out a descriptive part and the panel’s findings and
conclusions.

Each Party may submit to the panel written comments and a written request to
review precise aspects of the interim report within 15 days of the date of issuance
of the interim report. A Party may comment on the other Party’s request within 10
days of the delivery of the request.

After considering any written comments and requests by each Party on the interim
report, the panel may modify the interim report and make any further examination
it considers appropriate.

Article 17.19: Final Report

I.

Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the panel shall issue a final report to the Parties
within 30 days of the date of issuance of the interim report. When the panel
considers that this deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the panel shall notify
the Parties in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the
panel plans to deliver its final report. Under no circumstances shall the delay exceed
30 days after the deadline.

The final report shall include a discussion of any written comments and requests

made by the Parties on the interim report. The panel may, in its final report, suggest
ways in which the final report could be implemented.

17-7

3.

The final report shall be made public within 15 days of its delivery to the Parties
unless the Parties otherwise agree to publish the final report only in parts or not to
publish the final report. The publication of the report shall be subject to requirement
to protect confidential information.

Article 17.20: Implementation of the Final Report

1.

Where the panel finds that the respondent Party has acted inconsistently with a
covered provision pursuant to Article 17.3 (Scope of Application), the respondent
Party shall take any measure necessary to comply promptly and in good faith with
the Panel ruling.

If it is impossible to comply immediately, the respondent Party shall, no later than
30 days after the delivery of the final report, notify the complaining Party of the
reasonable period of time necessary for compliance with the final report and the
Parties shall endeavour to agree on the reasonable period of time required for
compliance with the final report.

Article 17.21: Reasonable Period of Time for Compliance

1.

If the Parties have not agreed on the length of the reasonable period of time, the
complaining Party shall, no later than 20 days after the date of receipt of the
notification made by the respondent Party in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article
17.20 (Implementation of the Final Report) request in writing the original panel to
determine the length of the reasonable period of time. Such request shall be notified
simultaneously to the respondent Party. The 20-day period referred to in this
paragraph may be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.

The original panel shall deliver its decision to the Parties within 20 days from the
relevant request.

The length of the reasonable period of time for compliance with the final report
may be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.

Article 17.22: Compliance Review

1.

The respondent Party shall deliver a written notification of its progress in
complying with the final report to the complaining Party at least 30 days before
the expiry of the reasonable period of time for compliance with the final report
unless the Parties agree otherwise.

The respondent Party shall, no later than at the date of expiry of the reasonable
period of time, deliver a notification to the complaining Party of any measure that
it has taken to comply with the final report along with a description on how the
measure ensures compliance sufficient to allow the complaining Party to assess
the measure before the expiry of the reasonable period of time.

3. Where the Parties disagree on the existence of measures to comply with the final
report, or their consistency with the covered provisions, the complaining Party
may request in writing the original panel to decide on the matter before
compensation can be sought or suspension of benefits can be applied in accordance
with subparagraph 1(c) of Article 17.23 (Temporary Remedies in Case of Non-
Compliance). Such request shall be notified simultaneously to the respondent
Party.

4. The request shall provide the factual and legal basis for the complaint, including
the identification of the specific measures at issue and an indication of why any
measures taken by the respondent Party fail to comply with the final report or are
otherwise inconsistent with the covered provisions.

5. The panel shall deliver its decision to the Parties within 75 days of the date of
submission of the request.

Article 17.23: Temporary Remedies in Case of Non-Compliance
1. If the respondent Party:

(a) fails to notify any measure taken to comply with the final report before
the expiry of the reasonable period of time; or

(b) notifies the complaining Party in writing that it is not possible to comply
with the final report within the reasonable period of time; or

(c) has failed to eliminate the non-conformity pointed out by the original
panel referred to in Article 17.22 (Compliance Review) in the final
report within the reasonable period of time;

the respondent Party shall, on request of the complaining Party, enter into
consultations with a view to agreeing on mutually satisfactory compensation or any
alternative arrangement.

2. If the Parties fail to reach a mutually satisfactory agreement within 20 days after
the date of receipt of the request made in accordance with paragraph 1, the
complaining Party may deliver a written notification to the respondent Party that
it intends to suspend the application of concessions or other obligations under this
Agreement.

3. The complaining Party may begin the suspension of concessions or other
obligations referred to in the preceding paragraph 25 days after the notification of
such suspension, unless the respondent Party made a request under paragraph 7.

4. The suspension of concessions or other obligations:
(a) shall be at a level equivalent to the nullification or impairment that is

caused by the failure of the respondent Party to comply with the final
report; and

(b) shall be restricted to benefits accruing to the respondent Party under this
Agreement.

5. In considering what concessions or other obligations to suspend in accordance

with paragraph 2, the complaining Party shall apply the following principles:

(a) the complaining Party should first seek to suspend the concessions or
other obligations in the same sector or sectors as that affected by the
measure that the panel has found to be inconsistent with this Agreement;
and

(b) the complaining Party may suspend concessions or other obligations in
other sectors, if it considers that it is not practicable or effective to
suspend concessions or other obligations in the same sector(s). The
communication in which it notifies such a decision shall indicate the
reasons on which it is based.

The suspension of concessions or other obligations or the mutually satisfactory
agreement foreseen in paragraph | shall be temporary and shall only apply until
the inconsistency of the measure with the relevant covered provisions has been
removed, or until the Parties have reached a mutually agreed solution pursuant to
Article 17.28 (Mutually Agreed Solution) of this Agreement.

If the respondent Party considers that the suspension of concessions or other
obligations does not comply with paragraphs 4 and 5, that Party may request in
writing the original panel to examine the matter no later than 20 days after the date
of receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 2. That request shall be
notified simultaneously to the complaining Party. The original panel shall notify
to the Parties its decision on the matter no later than 45 days of the receipt of the
request from the respondent Party, or if the original panel cannot be established
with its original members, from the date on which the last panellist of the newly
established panel is appointed. Concessions or other obligations shall not be
suspended until the panel has delivered its decision pursuant to this paragraph. The
suspension of concessions or other obligations shall be consistent with this
decision. When the panel considers that it cannot issue its report within the
aforementioned periods, the relevant period may be extended by the panel for a
maximum of 30 days with the consent of the Parties. The report shall be binding
on the Parties.

Article 17.24: Review of any Measure Taken to Comply After the Adoption of
Temporary Remedies

1.

Upon the notification by the respondent Party to the complaining Party of the
measure taken to comply with the final report panel ruling:

(a) in a situation where the right to suspend concessions or other obligations

has been exercised by the complaining Party in accordance with Article
17.23 (Temporary Remedies in Case of Non-Compliance), the

17-10

complaining Party shall terminate the suspension of concessions or
other obligations no later than 30 days after the date of receipt of the
notification, with the exception of the cases referred to in paragraph 2;
or

(b) in a situation where necessary compensation has been agreed, the
respondent Party may terminate the application of such compensation
no later than 30 days after the date of receipt of the notification, with
the exception of the cases referred to in paragraph 2.

2. If the Parties do not reach an agreement on whether the measure notified in
accordance with paragraph | is consistent with the relevant covered provisions
within 30 days after the date of receipt of the notification, the complaining Party
shall request in writing the original panel to examine the matter. That request shall
be notified simultaneously to the respondent Party. The decision of the panel shall
be notified to the Parties no later than 30 days after the date of submission of the
request. If the panel decides that the measure notified in accordance with
paragraph 1 is consistent with the covered provisions, the suspension of
concessions or other obligations, or the application of the compensation, as the
case may be, shall be terminated no later than 15 days after the date of the decision.
If the panel determines that the notified measure achieves only partial compliance
with the covered provisions, the level of suspension of benefits or other
obligations, or of the compensation, shall be adapted in light of the decision of the
panel.

Article 17.25: Suspension and Termination of Proceedings

If both Parties so request in writing, the panel shall suspend for a period agreed by the
Parties and not exceeding 12 consecutive months from such request. In the event of a
suspension of the work of the panel, the relevant time periods provided for from
Articles 17.8 (Establishment of a Panel) to 17.24 (Review of any Measure Taken to
Comply After the Adoption of Temporary Remedies) shall be extended by the same
period of time for which the work of the panel was suspended. The panel shall resume
its work before the end of the suspension period at the written request of both Parties.
If the work of the panel has been suspended for more than 12 consecutive months, the
authority of the panel shall lapse and the dispute settlement procedure shall be
terminated.

Article 17.26: Choice of Forum

1. Unless otherwise provided for in this Article, this Chapter is without prejudice to
the rights of the Parties to have recourse to dispute settlement procedures available
under other international trade agreements to which they are both Parties.

2. If a dispute with regard to a particular measure arises under this Agreement and
under another international trade agreement to which both Parties are party,
including the WTO Agreement, the complaining Party may select the forum in
which to settle the dispute.

17-11

3.

Once a Party has selected the forum and initiated dispute settlement proceedings
under this Chapter or under the other international agreement with respect to the
particular measure referred to in paragraph 2, the selected forum shall be used to
the exclusion of other fora, unless the forum selected first fails to make findings on
the issues in dispute for jurisdictional or procedural reasons.

4. For the purposes of paragraph 3:

(a) dispute settlement proceedings under this Chapter are deemed to be
initiated when a Party requests the establishment of a panel in
accordance with Article 17.8 (Establishment of a Panel);

(b) dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement are deemed
to be initiated when a Party requests the establishment of a panel in
accordance with Article 6 of the DSU; and

(c) dispute settlement proceedings under any other agreement are deemed
to be initiated in accordance with the relevant provisions of that
agreement.

Article 17.27: Costs

1.

2.

Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the costs of the panel and other expenses
associated with the conduct of its proceedings shall be borne in equal parts by both
Parties.

Each Party shall bear its own expenses and legal costs in the panel proceedings.

Article 17.28: Mutually Agreed Solution

1.

The Parties may reach a mutually agreed solution at any time with respect to any
dispute referred to in Article 17.3 (Scope of Application).

If a mutually agreed solution is reached during the panel procedure, the Parties shall
jointly notify that solution to the chairperson of the panel. Upon such notification,
the panel shall be terminated.

. Each Party shall take measures necessary to implement the mutually agreed

solution within the agreed time period.

No later than at the expiry of the agreed time period, the implementing Party shall
inform the other Party, in writing, of any measure that it has taken to implement the
mutually agreed solution.

Article 17.29: Time Periods

I.

All time periods laid down in this Chapter shall be counted in calendar days from
the day following the act or fact to which they refer, unless otherwise specified in
this Chapter.

17-12

2. Any time period referred to in this Chapter may be modified by mutual agreement
of the Parties.

Article 17.30: Annexes

The Joint Committee may modify Annexes 17A (Rules of Procedure for the Panel) and
17B (Code of Conduct).

17-13

CHAPTER 18
FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 18.1: Annexes, Side Letters, and Footnotes

The Annexes, footnotes, and Side Letters wherever so explicitly provided therein, shall
constitute an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 18.2: Amendments

The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. Any amendment shall
enter into force after the Parties exchange written notifications through diplomatic
channels certifying that they have completed all necessary domestic legal procedures,
or on such date as the Parties may agree. The amendments shall form an integral part
of this Agreement.

Article 18.3: Accession

Any country or group of countries may accede to this Agreement subject to such terms
and conditions as may be agreed between the country or group of countries and the
Parties and following approval in accordance with the applicable legal requirements
and procedures of each Party and acceding country.

Article 18.4: Termination

Either Party may terminate this Agreement by written notification to the other Party,
and such termination shall take effect six months after the date of the notification.

Article 18.5: Entry into Force

This Agreement shall enter into force 60 days after the date of the last written
communication through which the Parties notify each other that the domestic
procedures necessary for the entry into force of this Agreement have been completed,
or after such other period as the Parties may agree.

Article 18.6: Authentic Texts
This Agreement is done in duplicate in the Arabic, Vietnamese and English languages.

All texts shall be equally authentic. In case of any divergence, the English text shall
prevail.