Desiring to establish and develop mutually beneficial and equitable economic and trade
relations on the basis of mutual respect for their respective independence and sovereignty;

Acknowledging that the adoption of and compliance with international trade norms and
standards by the Parties will aid the development of mutually beneficial trade relations, and should
be the underlying basis of those relations;

Noting that Vietnam is a developing country at a low level of development, is in the process
of economic transition and is taking steps to integrate into the regional and world economy by, inter
alia, joining the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the ASEAN Free Trade Area
(AFTA), and the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum (APEC), and working toward
membership in the World Trade Organisation (WTO);

Having agreed that economic and trade ties and intellectual property rights protection are
an important and necessary element in the strengthening of their bilateral relations; and

Being convinced that an agreement on trade relations between the Parties will best serve
their mutual interests,

Have agreed as follows:

CHAPTER I
TRADE IN GOODS

Article 1
Most favoured Nation (Normal Trade Relations) '

1. Each Party shall accord immediately and unconditionally to products originating in or
exported to the territory of the other Party treatment no less favourable than that accorded
to like products originating in or exported to the territory of any third country in all matters
relating to:

A. customs duties and charges of any kind imposed on or in connection with
importation or exportation, including the method of levying such duties and charges;

B. methods of payment for imports and exports, and the international transfer of such
payments;
C. rules and formalities in connection with importation and exportation, including those

relating to customs clearance, transit, warehouses and transshipment;

D. taxes and other internal charges of any kind applied directly or indirectly to imported
products;
E. laws, regulations and other requirements affecting the sale, offering for sale,

purchase, transportation, distribution, storage and use of products in the domestic
market; and

F, the application of quantitative restrictions and the granting of licenses.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to action by a Party which is
consistent with such Party’s obligations under the World Trade Organisation and the
agreements administered thereby. A Party shall nonetheless extend to the products
originating in the territory of the other Party most-favoured nation treatment in respect of any
tariff reductions resulting from multilateral negotiations under the auspices of the World
Trade Organisation provided such Party accords such benefits to all other WTO members.

3. The provisions of paragraph | of this Article shall not apply to:

+ As used in this Agreement, the term “normal trade relations” shall have the same meaning

as the term “‘most favoured nation” treatment.

-2-

A. advantages accorded by either Party by virtue of such Party's full membership in a
customs union or free trade area, and

B. advantages accorded to third countries for the facilitation of frontier traffic.

The provisions of sub-paragraph 1.F of this Article shall not apply to trade in textiles and
textile products.

Article 2
National Treatment

Each Party shall administer tariff and non-tariff measures affecting trade in a manner which
affords meaningful competitive opportunities for products of the other Party with respect
to domestic competitors.

Accordingly, neither Party shall impose, directly or indirectly, on the products of the other
Party imported into its territory, internal taxes or charges of any kind in excess of those
applied, directly or indirectly, to like domestic products.

Each Party shall accord to products originating in the territory of the other Party treatment
no less favourable than that accorded to like domestic products in respect of all laws,
regulations and other requirements affecting their internal sale, offering for sale, purchase,
transportation, distribution, storage or use.

In addition to the obligations of paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article, the charges and measures
described in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article shall not otherwise be applied to imported
or domestic products so as to afford protection to domestic production.

The obligations of paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article shall be subject to the exceptions set
forth in Article II] of GATT 1994 and Annex A to this Agreement.

Consistent with the provisions of GATT 1994, the Parties shall ensure that technical
regulations and standards are not prepared, adopted or applied with a view to creating
obstacles to international trade or to protect domestic production. Furthermore, each Party
shall accord products imported from the territory of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than the better of the treatment accorded to like domestic products or like
products originating in any third country in relation to such technical regulations or
standards, including conformity testing and certification. Accordingly, the Parties shall:

A. ensure that any sanitary or phytosanitary measure which is not inconsistent with the

provisions of the GATT 1994, is applied only to the extent necessary to protect
human, animal or plant life or health, is based on scientific principles and is not

-3-

maintained without sufficient evidence (i.e., a risk assessment), taking into account
the availability of relevant scientific information and regional conditions, such as pest
free zones;

ensure that technical regulations are not prepared, adopted or applied with a view
to or with the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to international trade. For
this purpose, technical regulations shall not be more trade-restrictive than necessary
to fulfil a legitimate objective, taking into account the risks non- fulfilment would
create. Such legitimate objectives include national security requirements; the
prevention of deceptive practices; protection of human health or safety, animal or
plant life or health, or the environment. In assessing such risks, relevant elements
of consideration include available scientific and technical information, related
processing technology or intended end- uses of products.

Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall grant trading rights to the
nationals and companies of the other Party. With respect to Vietnam, such trading rights
shall be granted in accordance with the following schedule:

A.

Upon entry into force of this Agreement, all domestic enterprises shall be allowed
to engage in trading activities in all products, subject to restrictions listed in Annexes
B and C.

Upon entry into force of this Agreement, enterprises with capital directly invested
by U.S. nationals and companies shall be allowed, subject to the restrictions in
Annexes B and C, to import goods and products to be used in, or in connection with
their production or export activities whether or not such imports are specifically
identified in their initial investment license.

Three years after entry into force of this Agreement, enterprises with capital directly
invested by U.S. nationals and companies, in production and manufacturing sectors,
shall be allowed to engage in trading activities, subject to the restrictions listed in
Annexes B, C and D, and provided such enterprises are (1) engaged in substantial
business activities in the production and manufacturing sectors; and (ii) are lawfully
operating in Vietnam.

Three years after entry into force of this Agreement, U.S. nationals and companies
shall be allowed to enter into joint ventures with Vietnamese counterparts to engage
in trading activities in all products, subject to restrictions listed in Annexes B, C and
D. Equity contributed by U.S. companies shall not exceed 49% of such joint
ventures’ legal capital. Three years thereafter, this limitation on U.S. ownership
shall be 51%.

4.

E. Seven years after entry into force of this Agreement, U.S. companies shall be
allowed to establish 100% U.S.- owned companies to engage in trading activities in
all products, subject to restrictions listed in Annexes B, C and D.

If a Party has not acceded to the International Convention on the Harmonised Commodity
Description and Coding System, it will undertake every reasonable effort to do so as soon
as possible, but no later than one year after the entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 3
General Obligations with Respect to Trade

The Parties shall seek to achieve a satisfactory balance of market access opportunities
through the satisfactory reciprocation of reductions in tariffs and non-tariff barriers to trade
in goods resulting from multilateral negotiations.

The Parties shall except as specifically provided in Annexes B and C to this Agreement,
eliminate all import and export restrictions, quotas, licensing requirements, and controls for
all product and service categories, other than those that would be permitted by GATT 1994.

The Parties shall, within two years of the entry into force of this Agreement, limit all fees
and charges of whatever character (other than import and export duties and other taxes
within the purview of Article 2 of this Chapter) imposed on or in connection with
importation or exportation to an amount approximate to the cost of services rendered, and
ensure that such fees and charges do not represent an indirect protection to domestic
products or a taxation of imports or exports for fiscal purposes;

The Parties shall, within two years of the entry into force of this Agreement, adopt a system
of customs valuation based on the transaction value of the imported merchandise on which
duty is assessed, or of like merchandise, rather than on the value of merchandise of national
origin or on arbitrary or fictitious values, with the transaction value being the price actually
paid or payable for the goods when sold for export to the country of importation in
accordance with the standards established in the Agreement on Implementation of Article
VII of the GATT 1994; and

Within two years of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall ensure that the fees
and charges referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article and the customs valuation system
referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article are imposed or implemented uniformly and
consistently throughout each Party’s customs territory.

In addition to the obligations set forth in Article 1, Vietnam shall provide tariff treatment

to products originating in the customs territory of the United States in accordance with the
provisions of Annex E.

5-

7. Neither Party shall require its nationals or companies to engage in barter or countertrade
transactions with nationals or companies of the other Party. Nevertheless, where nationals
or companies decide to resort to barter or countertrade operations, the Parties may furnish
them information to facilitate the transaction and assist them as they would with respect to
other export and import operations.

8. The United States shall consider Vietnam’s eligibility for the Generalised System of
Preferences.

Article 4
Expansion and Promotion of Trade

Each Party shall encourage and facilitate the holding of trade promotional events such as trade fairs,
exhibitions, missions and seminars in its territory and in the territory of the other Party. Similarly,
each Party shall encourage and facilitate the participation of its respective nationals and companies
in such events. Subject to the laws in force within their respective territories, the Parties agree to
allow the import and re-export on a duty free basis of all articles for use in such events, provided
that such articles are not sold or otherwise transferred.

Article 5
Government Commercial Offices

I. Subject to its laws and regulations governing foreign missions, each Party shall allow
government commercial offices of the other Party to hire host-country nationals and, subject
to immigration laws and procedures, third-country nationals.

2. Each Party shall ensure unhindered access of host-country nationals to government
commercial offices of the other Party.

3. Each Party shall allow the participation of its nationals and companies in the commercial
activities of the other Party's government commercial offices.

4. Each Party shall allow access by government commercial office personnel of the other Party

to the relevant host-country officials, and to representatives of nationals and companies of
the host Party.

-6-

Article 6
Emergency Action on Imports

-7-

The Parties agree to consult promptly at the request of either Party whenever either actual
or prospective imports of products originating in the territory of the other Party cause or
threaten to cause or significantly contribute to market disruption. Market disruption exists
within a domestic industry whenever imports of an article, like or directly competitive with
an article produced by such domestic industry, are increasing rapidly, either absolutely or
relatively, so as to be a significant cause of material injury, or threat thereof, to such
domestic industry. The consultations provided in this paragraph shall have the objectives
of (a) presenting and examining the factors relating to such imports that may be causing or
threatening to cause or significantly contributing to market disruption, and (b) finding means
of preventing or remedying such market disruption. Such consultations shall be concluded
within sixty days from the date of the request for such consultations, unless the Parties agree
otherwise.

Unless a different solution is mutually agreed upon during the consultations, the importing
Party may (a) impose quantitative import limitations, tariff measures or any other restrictions
or measures it deems appropriate, and for such period of time it deems necessary, to prevent
or remedy threatened or actual market disruption, and (b) take appropriate measures to
ensure that imports from the territory of the other Party comply with such quantitative
limitations or other restrictions introduced in connection with market disruption. In this
event, the other Party shall be free to deviate from its obligations under this Agreement with
respect to substantially equivalent trade.

Where in the judgment of the importing Party, emergency action is necessary to prevent or
remedy such market disruption, the importing Party may take such action at any time
without prior notice or consultation, on the condition that consultations shall be effected
immediately after taking such action.

The Parties acknowledge that the elaboration of the market disruption safeguard provisions
in this Article is without prejudice to the right of either Party to apply its laws and
regulations applicable to trade in textiles and textile products, and its laws and regulations
applicable to unfair trade, including antidumping and countervailing duty laws.

Article 7
Commercial Disputes

For the purposes of Chapter I of this Agreement:

1.

Nationals and companies of either Party shall be accorded national treatment with respect
to access to all competent courts and administrative bodies in the territory of the other
Party, as plaintiffs, defendants or otherwise. They shall not be entitled to claim or enjoy
immunity from suit or execution of judgment, proceedings for the recognition and
enforcement of arbitral awards, or other liability in the territory of the other Party with

-8-

respect to commercial transactions. They also shall not claim or enjoy immunities from
taxation with respect to commercial transactions, except as may be provided in other
bilateral agreements.

The Parties encourage the adoption of arbitration for the settlement of disputes arising out
of commercial transactions concluded between nationals or companies of the United States
of America and nationals or companies of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Such
arbitration may be provided for by agreements in contracts between such nationals and
companies, or in separate written agreements between them.

The parties to such transactions may provide for arbitration under any internationally
recognised arbitration rules, including the UNCITRAL Rules of December 15, 1976, and
any modifications thereto, in which case the parties should designate an Appointing
Authority under said rules in a country other than the United States of America or the
Socialist Republic of Vietnam.

The parties to the dispute, unless otherwise agreed between them, should specify as the
place of arbitration a country other than the United States of America or the Socialist
Republic of Vietnam, that is a party to the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement
of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958.

Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent, and the Parties shall not prohibit, the
parties from agreeing upon any other form of arbitration or on the law to be applied in such
arbitration, or other form of dispute settlement which they mutually prefer and agree best
suits their particular needs.

Each Party shall ensure that an effective means exists within its territory for the recognition
and enforcement of arbitral awards.

Article 8
State Trading

The parties may establish or maintain a state enterprise, or grant to any enterprise, formally
or in effect, exclusive or special privileges, to import and export the products listed in Annex
C, provided however, that any such enterprise shall, in its purchases or sales involving either
imports or exports, act in a manner consistent with the general principles of non-
discriminatory treatment prescribed in this Agreement for governmental measures affecting
imports or exports by private traders.

The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall be understood to require that such

enterprises shall, having due regard to the other provisions of this Agreement, make any
such purchases or sales solely in accordance with commercial considerations, including

-9-

price, quality, availability, marketability, transportation and other conditions of purchase or
sale, and shall afford the enterprises of the other Party adequate opportunity, in accordance
with customary business practice, to compete for participation in such purchases or sales.

The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to imports of products for
immediate or ultimate consumption in government use and not otherwise for resale or use
in the production of goods for sale. With respect to such imports, each Party shall accord
to the trade of the other Party fair and equitable treatment.

Article 9
Definitions

As used in this Chapter, the terms set forth below shall have the following meaning:

1.

"company," means any entity constituted or organised under applicable law, whether or not
for profit, and whether privately or governmentally owned or controlled, and includes a
corporation, trust, partnership, sole proprietorship, branch, joint venture, association, or
other organisation.

“enterprise,” means a company.

"national," means a natural person who is a national of a Party under its applicable law.

“commercial dispute,” means a dispute between parties to a commercial transaction which
arises out of that transaction.

“trading rights,” means the right to engage in import or export activities.

-10-

CHAPTER II

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

Article 1
Objectives, Principles and Scope of Obligations

Each Party shall provide in its territory to the nationals of the other Party adequate and
effective protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights.

The Parties recognise the underlying public policy objectives of national systems for the
protection of intellectual property, including developmental and technological objectives,
and ensure that measures to protect and enforce intellectual property rights do not
themselves become barriers to legitimate trade.

To provide adequate and effective protection and enforcement of intellectual property
rights, each Party shall, at a minimum, give effect to this Chapter and the substantive
economic provisions of:

A. the Geneva Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms Against
Unauthorised Duplication of their Phonograms, 1971 (Geneva Convention);

B. the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 1971
(Berne Convention);

C. the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, 1967 (Paris
Convention);

D. the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants, 1978
(UPOV Convention (1978)), or the International Convention for the Protection of
New Varieties of Plants, 1991 (UPOV Convention (1991)); and

E. the Convention Relating to the Distribution of Programme-Carrying Signals
Transmitted by Satellite (1974).

If a Party has not acceded to the specified text of any such Conventions on or before the
date of entry into force of this Agreement, it shall promptly make every effort to accede.

A Party may implement in its domestic law more extensive protection and enforcement of

intellectual property rights than is required under this Chapter, provided that such protection
and enforcement are not inconsistent with this Chapter.

-10-

Article 2
Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

“confidential information” includes trade secrets, privileged information, and other
undisclosed information that has not become subject to an unrestricted public disclosure
under the Party's domestic law.

“encrypted program-carrying satellite signal” means a program-carrying satellite signal that
is transmitted in a form whereby the aural or visual characteristics, or both, are modified or
altered for the purpose of preventing the unauthorised reception of a program carried in that
signal by persons without the authorised equipment that is designed to eliminate the effects
of such modification or alteration.

“intellectual property rights” refers to copyrights and related rights, trademarks, patents,
layout designs (topographies) of integrated circuits, encrypted program-carrying satellite
signals, confidential information (trade secrets), industrial designs and rights in plant
varieties.

“lawful distributor of an encrypted satellite signal” in a Party means the person who
originally transmitted the signal.

“national” of a Party shall, in respect of the relevant intellectual property rights, be
understood as those natural or legal persons that would meet the criteria for eligibility for
protection provided for in the Paris Convention, the Berne Convention, the Geneva
Convention, the Convention Relating to the Distribution of Programme-Carrying Signals
Transmitted by Satellite, the International Convention for the Protection of Performers,
Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations, the UPOV Convention (1978),
the UPOV Convention (1991) or the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of
Integrated Circuits adopted at Washington in 1989, as if each Party were a Party to those
Conventions, and with respect to intellectual property rights that are not the subject of these
Conventions, "national of a Party" shall be understood at least to include any person that
is a citizen or permanent resident of that Party.

“public” includes, with respect to rights of communication and performance of works
provided for under Articles 11, 11bis(1) and 14(1)(1) of the Berne Convention, with respect
to dramatic, dramatico-musical, musical and cinematographic works, at least, any
aggregation of individuals intended to be the object of, and capable of perceiving,
communications or performances of works, regardless of whether they can do so at the
same or different times or in the same or different places, provided that such an aggregation
is larger than a family and its immediate circle of acquaintances or is not a group comprising

-|]-

a limited number of individuals having similarly close ties that has not been formed for the
principal purpose of receiving such performances and communications of works.

“right holder” includes the right holder personally, any other natural or legal person
authorised by the right holder who is an exclusive licensee of the right, or other authorised
persons, including federations and associations, having legal standing under domestic law
to assert such rights.

Article 3
National Treatment

Each Party shall accord to nationals of the other Party treatment no less favourable than it
accords to its own nationals with regard to the acquisition, protection, enjoyment and
enforcement of all intellectual property rights and any benefits derived therefrom.

A Party shall not, as a condition of according national treatment under this Article, require
right holders to comply with any formalities or conditions (including fixation, publication
or exploitation in the territory of a Party) in order to acquire, enjoy, enforce and exercise
rights or benefits in respect of copyright and related rights.

A Party may derogate from paragraph 1 in relation to its judicial and administrative
procedures for the protection or enforcement of intellectual property rights, including any
procedure requiring a national of the other Party to designate for service of process an
address in the Party’s territory or to appoint an agent in the Party's territory, if the
derogation is consistent with the relevant Convention listed in Article 1.3 above, provided
that such derogation:

A. is necessary to secure compliance with measures that are not inconsistent with this
Agreement; and

B. is not applied in a manner that would constitute a restriction on trade.
No Party shall have any obligation under this Article with respect to procedures provided

in multilateral agreements concluded under the auspices of the World Intellectual Property
Organisation relating to the acquisition or maintenance of intellectual property rights.

Article 4
Copyright and Related Rights

Each Party shall protect all works that embody original expression within the meaning of
the Berne Convention. In particular:

-|2-

A. all types of computer programs are literary works within the meaning of the Berne
Convention and each Party shall protect them as such; and

B. compilations of data or other material, whether in machine readable or other form,
which by reason of the selection or arrangement of their contents constitute
intellectual creations, shall be protected as works.

The protection a Party provides under subparagraph (B) shall not extend to the data or
material itself, or prejudice any copyright subsisting in that data or material.

Each Party shall provide to authors and their successors in interest those rights enumerated
in the Berne Convention in respect of works covered by paragraph 1, and shall provide the
right to authorise or prohibit:

A. the importation into the Party's territory of copies of the work;

B. the first public distribution of the original and each copy of the work by sale, rental
or otherwise;

C. the communication of a work to the public; and

D. the rental of the original or a copy of a computer program for the purposes of
commercial advantage.

Subparagraph (D) shall not apply where the copy of the computer program is not itself an
essential object of the rental. Each Party shall provide that putting the original or a copy
of a computer program on the market with the right holder's consent shall not exhaust the
rental right.

Each Party shall provide that for copyright and related rights:

A. any person acquiring or holding any economic rights may freely and separately
transfer such rights by contract; and

B. any person acquiring or holding any such economic rights by virtue of a contract,
including contracts of employment underlying the creation of works and sound
recordings, shall be able to exercise those rights in its own name and enjoy fully the
benefits derived from those rights.

Each Party shall provide that, where the term of protection of a work is to be calculated on

a basis other than the life of a natural person, the term shall be not less than 75 years from
the end of the calendar year of the first authorised publication of the work or, failing such

-|3-

authorised publication within 25 years from the creation of the work, not less than 100 years
from the end of the calendar year of the creation of the work.

Neither Party may grant translation or reproduction licenses permitted under the Appendix
to the Berne Convention where legitimate needs in that Party's territory for copies or
translations of the work could be met by the right holder's voluntary actions but for

obstacles created by the Party's measures.

Each Party shall provide to the right holder in a sound recording the right to authorise or
prohibit:

A. the direct or indirect reproduction, in whole or in part, of the sound recording;
B. the importation into the Party's territory of copies of the sound recording;

C. the first public distribution of the original and each copy of the sound recording by
sale, rental or otherwise; and

D. the rental, lease or lending of the original or a copy of the sound recording for the
purposes of commercial advantage.

Each Party shall provide that putting the original or a copy of a sound recording on the
market with the right holder's consent shall not exhaust the rental right.

Each Party shall provide to performers the right to authorise or prohibit:
A. the fixation of their live musical performances in a sound recording;

B. the reproduction of unauthorised fixations of their live musical performances in a
sound recording;

C. the transmission or other communication to the public of sounds in a live musical
performance; and

D. the distribution, sale, rental, disposal or transfer of the unauthorised fixations of
their live performances in a sound recording, regardless of where the fixations were
made.

Each Party shall, through operation of this Agreement, apply the provisions of Article 18
of the Berne Convention to works and, with such modifications as may be necessary, to
existing sound recordings.

-14-

Each Party shall confine limitations or exceptions to the rights provided for in this Article
to certain special cases that do not conflict with a normal exploitation of the work, and do
not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the right holder.

Article 5
Protection of Encrypted Program-Carrying Satellite Signals

For serious violations involving the protection of encrypted program-carrying satellite
signals, each Party shall make available appropriate remedies, including civil and criminal
remedies.

Serious violations involving the protection of encrypted program-carrying satellite signals
shall include the following:

A. The manufacture, assembly, modification, or distribution (including import, export,
sale or lease) of a device or system, by any person knowing or having reason to
know that the device or system is primarily of assistance in the unauthorised
decoding of an encrypted program-carrying satellite signal; and

B. The wilful receipt or further distribution of an encrypted program-carrying satellite
signal that has been decoded without the authorisation of the lawful distributor of
the signal (regardless of the location of such person) or of any other person or
persons designated by the original transmitter as authorised distributors of such
signal in such Party.

Each Party shall provide that civil remedies provided for pursuant to paragraph | of this
Article shall be available to any person that holds an interest in the encrypted program-
carrying satellite signal or the content thereof.

Article 6
Trademarks

For the purposes of this Agreement, a trademark consists of any sign, or any combination
of signs, capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one person from those of
another, including words, personal names, designs, letters, numerals, combinations of
colours, figurative elements or the shape of goods or of their packaging. Trademarks shall
include service marks, collective marks and certification marks.

Each Party shall provide to the owner of a registered trademark the right to prevent all

persons not having the owner's consent from using in commerce identical or similar signs
for goods or services that are identical, or similar to those goods or services in respect of

-15-

which the owner's trademark is registered, where such use would result in a likelihood of
confusion. In the case of the use of an identical sign for identical goods or services, a
likelihood of confusion shall be presumed. The rights described above shall not prejudice
any prior rights, nor shall they affect the possibility of making rights available on the basis
of use.

A Party may make registrability depend on use. However, actual use of a trademark shall
not be a condition for filing an application for registration. Neither Party may refuse an
application solely on the ground that intended use has not taken place before the expiry of
a period of three years from the date of application for registration.

Each Party shall provide a system for the registration of trademarks, which shall include:

A. examination of applications;

B. notice to be given to an applicant of the reasons for the refusal to register a
trademark;

C. a reasonable opportunity for the applicant to respond to the notice;

D. publication of each trademark either before or promptly after it is registered; and

E. a reasonable opportunity for interested persons to petition to cancel the registration

of a trademark.

The nature of the goods or services to which a trademark is to be applied shall in no case
form an obstacle to the registration of a trademark.

Article 6bis of the Paris Convention shall apply, with such modifications as may be
necessary, to services. In determining whether a trademark is well-known, account shall be
taken of the knowledge of the trademark in the relevant sector of the public, including
knowledge in the Party's territory obtained as a result of the promotion of the trademark.
Neither Party may require that the reputation of the trademark extend beyond the sector of
the public that normally deals with the relevant goods or services or that the trademark be
registered.

Each Party shall use the International Classification of Goods and Services for registration.
Neither Party shall use such classification as the only basis for determining the likelihood
of confusion.

Each Party shall provide that the initial registration of a trademark be for a term of at least

10 years, and that the registration be indefinitely renewable for terms of not less than 10
years when conditions for renewal have been met.

-16-

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Each Party shall require the use of a trademark to maintain a registration. The registration
may be canceled for the reason of non-use only after an uninterrupted period of at least
three years of non-use, unless valid reasons based on the existence of obstacles to such
use are shown by the trademark owner. The law shall recognise, as valid reasons for non-
use, circumstances arising independently of the will of the trademark owner that constitute
an obstacle to the use of the trademark, such as import restrictions on, or other government
requirements for, goods or services identified by the trademark.

Each Party shall recognise the use of a trademark by a person other than the trademark
owner, where such use is subject to the owner's control, as use of the trademark for
purposes of maintaining the registration.

Neither Party may encumber the use of a trademark in commerce by special requirements,
such as a use that reduces the trademark's function as an indication of source or a use with
another trademark.

A Party may determine conditions on the licensing and assignment of trademarks, it being
understood that the compulsory licensing of trademarks shall not be permitted. The owner
of a registered trademark shall have the right to assign its trademark with or without the
transfer of the business to which the trademark belongs. However, a Party may require a
transfer of goodwill in a mark as part of a valid transfer of the mark.

A Party may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark, such as fair
use of descriptive terms, provided that such exceptions take into account the legitimate
interests of the trademark owner and of other persons.

A Party may refuse to register trademarks that consist of or comprise immoral, deceptive
or scandalous matter, or matter that may disparage or falsely suggest a connection with
persons, living or dead, institutions, beliefs or a Party's national symbols, or bring them into
contempt or disrepute. Each Party shall prohibit the registration as a trademark of words
that generically designate goods or services or types of goods or services to which the
trademark applies.

Article 7
Patents

Subject to the provision of paragraph 2 of this Article, each Party shall make patents
available for any invention, whether a product or process, in all fields of technology,
provided that such invention is new, resulted from an inventive step and is capable of
industrial application. For purposes of this Article, a Party may deem the terms "inventive
step" and "capable of industrial application" to be synonymous with the terms "non-
obvious" and "useful", respectively.

-17-

Parties may exclude from patentability:

A.

inventions, the prevention within their territory of the commercial exploitation of
which is necessary to protect public order or morality, including to protect human,
animal or plant life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment,
provided that such exclusion is not made merely because the exploitation is
prohibited by their law;

diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of humans or animals;

essentially biological processes for the production of plants or animals other than
non-biological and microbiological processes; animal varieties; plant varieties. The
exclusion for plant varieties is limited to those plant varieties that satisfy the
definition provided in Article 1(vi) of the UPOV Convention (1991); such definition
shall apply mutatis mutandis to animal varieties. The exclusions for plant and
animal varieties shall not apply to plant or animal inventions that could encompass
more than one variety. Moreover, the Parties shall provide for the protection of
plant varieties by an effective sui generis system in accordance with subparagraph
3.D of Article 1 of this Chapter.

Each Party shall provide that:

A.

where the subject matter of a patent is a product, the patent shall confer on the
patent owner the right to prevent other persons from making, using, selling, offering
for sale or importing for these purposes the subject matter of the patent, without the
patent owner's consent; and

where the subject matter of a patent is a process, the patent shall confer on the
patent owner the right to prevent other persons from using that process and from
using, selling, offering for sale or importing for these purposes at least the product
obtained directly by that process, without the patent owner's consent.

A Party may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent,
provided that such exceptions do not conflict with a normal exploitation of the patent and
do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner.

Patents shall be available and patent rights enjoyable without discrimination as to the field
of technology or whether products are imported or locally produced.

A Party may revoke a patent only when grounds exist that would have justified a refusal to
grant the patent.

-18-

Each Party shall permit patent owners to assign and transfer by succession their patents, and
to conclude licensing contracts.

A Party may decline to allow use without the authorisation of the right holder of a patent.
However, where the law of a Party allows for use of the subject matter of a patent, other
than use allowed under paragraph 4, without the authorisation of the right holder, including
use by the government or other persons authorised by the government, the Party shall
respect the following provisions:

A.

B.

authorisation of such use shall be considered on its individual merits;

such use may be permitted only if, prior to such use, the proposed user has made
efforts to obtain authorisation from the right holder on reasonable commercial terms
and conditions and such efforts have not been successful within a reasonable period
of time. The requirement to make such efforts may be waived by a Party in the case
of a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency or in cases of
public non-commercial use. In situations of national emergency or other
circumstances of extreme urgency, the right holder shall, nevertheless, be notified
as soon as reasonably practicable. In the case of public non-commercial use, where
the government or contractor, without making a patent search, knows or has
demonstrable grounds to know that a valid patent is or will be used by or for the
government, the right holder shall be informed promptly;

the scope and duration of such use shall be limited to the purpose for which it was
authorised, and in the case of semiconductor technology shall only be for public
non-commercial use or to remedy a practice determined after judicial or
administrative process to be anti-competitive;

such use shall be non-exclusive;

such use shall be non-assignable, except with that part of the enterprise or goodwill
that enjoys such use;

any such use shall be authorised predominantly for the supply of the Party's
domestic market;

authorisation for such use shall be liable, subject to adequate protection of the
legitimate interests of the persons so authorised, to be terminated if and when the
circumstances that led to it cease to exist and are unlikely to recur. The competent
authority shall have the authority to review, on petition of an interested party, the
continued existence of these circumstances;

-19-

10.

H. the right holder shall be paid adequate remuneration in the circumstances of each
case, taking into account the economic value of the authorisation;

I. the legal validity of any decision relating to the authorisation shall be subject to
judicial or other independent review by a distinct higher authority;

J. any decision relating to the remuneration provided in respect of such use shall be
subject to judicial or other independent review by a distinct higher authority;

K. the Party shall not be obliged to apply the conditions set out in subparagraphs B and
F of this Article where such use is permitted to remedy a practice determined after
judicial or administrative process to be anticompetitive. The need to correct anti-
competitive practices may be taken into account in determining the amount of
remuneration in such cases. Competent authorities shall have the authority to refuse
termination of authorisation if and when the conditions that led to such
authorisation are likely to recur; and

L. the Party shall not authorise the use of the subject matter of a patent to permit the
exploitation of another patent except as a remedy for an adjudicated violation of
domestic laws regarding anticompetitive practices.

Where the subject matter of a patent is a process for obtaining a product, each Party shall,
in any infringement proceeding, place on the defendant the burden of establishing that the
allegedly infringing product was made by a process other than the patented process in one
or more of the following situations:

A. the product obtained by the patented process is new; or

B. a substantial likelihood exists that the allegedly infringing product was made by the
process and the patent owner has been unable through reasonable efforts to
determine the process actually used.

In the gathering and evaluation of evidence, the legitimate interests of the defendant in
protecting its trade secrets shall be taken into account.

Each Party shall provide a term of protection for patents that shall not end before the
expiration of a period of twenty years counted from the date of filing. A Party may extend
the term of patent protection, in appropriate cases, to compensate for delays caused by
regulatory approval processes.

-2(-

Article 8
Layout Designs (Topographies) of Integrated Circuits

Each Party shall protect layout designs (topographies) of integrated circuits ("layout
designs") in accordance with Articles 2 through 7, 12 and 16(3), other than Article 6(3), of
the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits as opened for signature
on May 26, 1989, and, in addition, shall comply with the provisions of paragraphs 2 through
8 of this Article.

Subject to paragraph 3, each Party shall make it unlawful for any person without the right
holder's authorisation to reproduce, import or distribute a protected layout design, an
integrated circuit in which a protected layout design is incorporated, or an article
incorporating such an integrated circuit only insofar as it continues to contain an unlawfully
reproduced layout design.

Neither Party may make unlawful any of the acts referred to in paragraph 2 performed in
respect of an integrated circuit that incorporates an unlawfully reproduced layout design,
or any article that incorporates such an integrated circuit, where the person performing
those acts or ordering those acts to be done did not know and had no reasonable ground to
know, when it acquired the integrated circuit or article incorporating such an integrated
circuit, that it incorporated an unlawfully reproduced layout design.

Each Party shall provide that, after the person referred to in paragraph 3 has received
sufficient notice that the layout design was unlawfully reproduced, such person may perform
any of the acts with respect to the stock on hand or ordered before such notice, but shall be
liable to pay the right holder for doing so an amount equivalent to a reasonable royalty such
as would be payable under a freely negotiated license in respect of such a layout design.

Neither Party may permit the compulsory licensing of layout designs of integrated circuits.

Any Party that requires registration as a condition for protection of a layout design shall
provide that the term of protection shall not end before the expiration of a period of 10
years counted from the date of filing an application for registration or from the date on
which the layout design is first commercially exploited in the world, whichever occurs first.

Where a Party does not require registration as a condition for protection of a layout design,
the Party shall provide a term of protection of not less than 10 years from the date of the

first commercial exploitation of the layout design, wherever in the world it occurs.

Notwithstanding paragraphs 6 and 7, a Party may provide that the protection shall lapse 15
years after the creation of the layout design.

-21-

Article 9
Confidential Information (Trade Secrets)

In the course of ensuring effective protection against unfair competition as provided in
Article 10bis of the Paris Convention (1967), each Party shall protect confidential
information in accordance with paragraph 2 below and data submitted to government or
governmental agencies in accordance with paragraphs 5 and 6 below.

Each Party shall provide the legal means for any person to prevent confidential information
from being disclosed to, acquired by, or used by others without the consent of the person
lawfully in control of the information in a manner contrary to honest commercial practices,
in so far as, and for so long as:

A. the information is not generally known or readily ascertainable;
B. the information has commercial value because it is secret; and
C. the person lawfully in control of the information has taken reasonable steps under

the circumstances to keep it secret.

For the purposes of this Agreement, "In a manner contrary to honest commercial practices"
shall mean at least practices such as breach of contract, breach of confidence and
inducement to breach, and includes the acquisition of undisclosed information by third
parties who knew, or were negligent in failing to know, that such practices were involved
in the acquisition.

Neither Party may discourage or impede the voluntary licensing of confidential information
by imposing excessive or discriminatory conditions on such licenses or conditions that dilute
the value of the confidential information.

If a Party requires, as a condition for approving the marketing of pharmaceutical or
agrochemical products, the submission of undisclosed test or other data, the origination of
which involves a considerable effort, the Party shall protect such data against unfair
commercial use. In addition, each Party shall protect such data against disclosure, except
where necessary to protect the public.

Each Party shall provide that for data of a type referenced in paragraph 5 that are submitted
to the Party after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, no other applicant for
product approval may, without permission of the person that submitted them, rely on that
data in support of an application for product approval during a reasonable period of time
after their submission. For this purpose, a reasonable period shall normally mean not less
than five years from the date on which the Party granted approval to the person that

-2)2-

produced the data for approval to market its product, taking into account the nature of the
data and the person's efforts and expenditures in producing them.

Article 10
Industrial Designs

Each Party shall provide for the protection of independently created industrial designs that
are new or original. A Party may provide that:

A. designs are not new or original if they do not significantly differ from known designs
or combinations of known design features; and

B. such protection shall not extend to designs dictated essentially by technical or
functional considerations.

Each Party shall ensure that the requirements for securing protection for textile designs, in
particular in regard to any cost, examination or publication, do not unreasonably impair a
person's opportunity to seek and obtain such protection. A Party may comply with this
obligation through industrial design law or copyright law.

Each Party shall provide the owner of a protected industrial design the right to prevent other
persons not having the owner's consent from making, selling, importing or otherwise
distributing articles bearing or embodying a design that is a copy, or substantially a copy,
of the protected design, when such acts are undertaken for commercial purposes.

A Party may provide limited exceptions to the protection of industrial designs, provided that
such exceptions do not conflict with the normal exploitation of protected industrial designs
and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the owner of the protected
design.

Each Party shall provide a term of protection for industrial designs available for the amount
of at least 10 years.

Article 11
Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights

As specified in this Article and Articles 12 through 15 hereof, each Party shall provide
procedures in its domestic law that permit effective action against infringement of the
intellectual property rights covered by this Chapter. These procedures shall include
expeditious remedies to prevent infringement and remedies substantial enough to deter

-23-

future infringement. Each Party shall apply enforcement procedures in a manner that does
not create barriers to legitimate trade and contains effective safeguards against abuse.

Each Party shall ensure that its enforcement procedures are fair and equitable, are not
unnecessarily complicated or costly, and do not entail unreasonable time limits or
unwarranted delays.

Each Party shall ensure that decisions on the merits of a case in judicial and administrative
enforcement proceedings are:

A. in writing and state the reasons on which the decisions are based;

B. made available without undue delay at least to the parties in a proceeding; and

C. based only on evidence in respect of which such parties were offered the
opportunity to be heard.

Each Party shall ensure that parties in a proceeding have an opportunity to have final
administrative decisions reviewed by a judicial authority of that Party and, subject to
jurisdictional provisions in its domestic laws concerning the importance of a case, to have
reviewed at least the legal aspects of initial judicial decisions on the merits of a case.
Notwithstanding the above, neither Party shall be required to provide for judicial review of
acquittals in criminal cases.

Article 12
Specific Procedural and Remedial Aspects of Civil
and Administrative Procedures

Each Party shall make available to right holders civil judicial procedures for the enforcement
of any intellectual property right covered by this Agreement. Each Party shall provide that:

A. defendants have the right to written notice that is timely and contains sufficient
detail, including the basis of the claims;

B. parties in a proceeding are allowed to be represented by independent legal counsel;

C. enforcement procedures do not include imposition of overly burdensome
requirements concerning mandatory personal appearances;

D. all parties in a proceeding are duly entitled to substantiate their claims and to present
relevant evidence; and

-24-

E.

the procedures include a means to identify and protect confidential information.

Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities:

A.

where a party in a proceeding has presented reasonably available evidence sufficient
to support its claims and has specified evidence relevant to the substantiation of its
claims that is within the control of the opposing party, to order the opposing party
to produce such evidence, subject in appropriate cases to conditions that ensure the
protection of confidential information;

where a party in a proceeding voluntarily and without good reason refuses access
to, or otherwise does not provide relevant evidence under that party's control within
a reasonable period, or significantly impedes a proceeding relating to an
enforcement action, to make preliminary and final determinations, affirmative or
negative, on the basis of the evidence presented, including the complaint or the
allegation presented by the party adversely affected by the denial of access to
evidence, subject to providing the parties an opportunity to be heard on the
allegations or evidence;

to order a party in a proceeding to desist from an infringement, including measures
to prevent the entry into the channels of commerce of imported goods that involve
the infringement of an intellectual property right, immediately after customs
clearance of such goods.

to order the infringer of an intellectual property right to pay the right holder
damages adequate to compensate for the injury the right holder has suffered because
of the infringement and the profits of the infringer that are attributable to the
infringement and are not taken into account in computing the actual damages;

to order an infringer of an intellectual property right to pay the right holder's
expenses, which may include appropriate attorney's fees; and

to order a party in a proceeding at whose request measures were taken and who has
abused enforcement procedures to provide adequate compensation to any party
wrongfully enjoined or restrained in the proceeding for the injury suffered because
of such abuse and to pay that party's expenses, which may include appropriate
attorney's fees.

With respect to the authority referred to in subparagraph 2.D, a Party shall, at least with
respect to works protected by copyright or neighbouring rights, provide judicial authorities
with the authority to order the payment of pre-established damages. Judicial authorities
shall exercise such authority at their discretion.

-25-

Each Party shall, in order to create an effective deterrent to infringement and counterfeiting,
authorise its judicial authorities to order that:

A. goods that they have found to be infringing be, without compensation of any sort,
disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to avoid any
injury caused to the right holder or, unless this would be contrary to existing
constitutional requirements, destroyed; and

B. materials and implements the predominant use of which has been in the creation of
the infringing goods be, without compensation of any sort, disposed of outside the
channels of commerce in such a manner as to minimise the risks of further
infringements.

In considering whether to issue such an order, judicial authorities shall take into account
the need for proportionality between the seriousness of the infringement and the remedies
ordered, as well as the interests of other persons. In regard to counterfeit trademark goods,
the simple removal of the trademark unlawfully affixed shall not be sufficient, other than
in exceptional cases, to permit release of the goods into the channels of commerce.

In respect of the administration of any law pertaining to the protection or enforcement of
intellectual property rights, each Party may exempt public authorities and officials from
liability, unless their actions were not taken or intended in good faith in the course of the
administration of such laws.

Notwithstanding the other provisions of Articles 11 through 15 of this Chapter, in any case
of infringement of an intellectual property right brought against a Party to this Agreement,
remedies available against that Party may be limited to the payment to the right holder of
adequate remuneration in the circumstances of each case, taking into account the economic
value of the use.

Each Party shall provide that, where a civil remedy can be ordered as a result of

administrative procedures on the merits of a case, such procedures shall conform to
principles equivalent in substance to those set out in this Article.

Article 13
Provisional Measures

Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities to order prompt and effective provisional
measures:

A. to prevent an infringement of any intellectual property right, and in particular to
prevent the entry into the channels of commerce in their jurisdiction of allegedly

-26-

infringing goods, including imported goods immediately after customs clearance;
and

B. to preserve relevant evidence in regard to the alleged infringement.

Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities to require any applicant for provisional
measures to provide to the judicial authorities any evidence reasonably available to that
applicant that the judicial authorities consider necessary to enable them to determine with
a sufficient degree of certainty whether:

A. the applicant is the right holder;
B. the applicant's right is being infringed or such infringement is imminent; and

C. any delay in the issuance of such measures is likely to cause irreparable harm to the
right holder, or there is a demonstrable risk of evidence being destroyed.

Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities to require the applicant to provide a
security or equivalent assurance sufficient to protect the interests of the defendant and to
prevent abuse.

Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities to require an applicant for provisional
measures to provide other information necessary for the identification of the relevant goods
by the authority that will execute the provisional measures.

Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities to order provisional measures on an ex
parte basis, in particular where any delay is likely to cause irreparable harm to the right
holder, or where there is a demonstrable risk of evidence being destroyed.

Each Party shall authorise that where provisional measures are adopted by that Party's
judicial authorities on an ex parte basis:

A. a person affected shall be given notice of those measures without delay but in any
event no later than immediately after the execution of the measures;

B. a defendant shall, on request, have those measures reviewed by that Party's judicial
authorities for the purpose of deciding, within a reasonable period after notice of
those measures is given, whether the measures shall be modified, revoked or
confirmed, and shall be given an opportunity to be heard in the review proceedings.

Without prejudice to paragraph 5, each Party shall provide that, on the request of the
defendant, the Party's judicial authorities shall revoke or otherwise cease to apply the

-27-

provisional measures taken on the basis of paragraphs 1 and 4 if proceedings leading to a
decision on the merits are not initiated:

A. within a reasonable period as determined by the judicial authority ordering the
measures where the Party's domestic law so permits; or

B. in the absence of such a determination, within a period of no more than 20 working
days or 31 calendar days, whichever is longer.

Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities to order, on request of the defendant, that
the applicant provide compensation for injury caused by provisional measures:

A. if the provisional measures are revoked or lapse because of any act or omission of
the applicant, or

B. if the judicial authorities subsequently find there has been no infringement or threat
of infringement of any intellectual property right.

Each Party shall provide that, where a provisional measure can be ordered as a result of
administrative procedures, such procedures shall conform to principles equivalent in
substance to those set out in this Article.

Article 14
Criminal Procedures and Penalties

Each Party shall provide criminal procedures and penalties to be applied at least in cases of
wilful trademark counterfeiting or infringement of copyrights or neighbouring rights on a
commercial scale. Each Party shall provide that penalties available include imprisonment
or monetary fines, or both, sufficient to provide a deterrent, consistent with the level of
penalties applied for crimes of a corresponding gravity.

Each Party shall provide that, in appropriate cases, its judicial authorities may order the
seizure, forfeiture and destruction of infringing goods and of any materials and implements
the predominant use of which has been in the commission of the offence.

Each Party may provide that, in appropriate cases, its judicial authorities may impose

criminal penalties for the infringement of intellectual property rights other than those in
paragraph 1 of this Article, where they are committed wilfully and on a commercial scale.

-28-

Article 15
Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights at the Border

Each Party shall adopt procedures to enable a right holder, who has valid grounds for
suspecting that the importation of counterfeit trademark goods or unauthorised copies of
works protected by copyrights or neighbouring rights may take place, to lodge an application
in writing with its competent authorities, whether administrative or judicial, for the
suspension by the customs administration of the release of such goods into free circulation.
No Party shall be obligated to apply such procedures to goods in transit. A Party may
permit such an application to be made in respect of goods that involve other infringements
of intellectual property rights, provided that the requirements of this Article are met. A
Party may also provide for corresponding procedures concerning the suspension by the
customs administration of the release of infringing goods destined for exportation from its
territory.

Each Party shall require any applicant who initiates procedures under paragraph | to
provide adequate evidence:

A. to satisfy that Party's competent authorities that, under its domestic laws, there is
prima facie an infringement of its intellectual property right; and

B. to supply a sufficiently detailed description of the goods to make them readily
recognisable by the customs administration.

The competent authorities shall inform the applicant within a reasonable period whether
they have accepted the application and, if so, the period for which the customs
administration will take action.

Each Party shall authorise its competent authorities to require an applicant under paragraph
1 to provide a security or equivalent assurance sufficient to protect the defendant and the
competent authorities and to prevent abuse. Such security or equivalent assurance shall not
unreasonably deter recourse to these procedures.

A Party's customs administration, upon receiving an application pursuant to procedures
adopted in accordance with this Article, may suspend the release of goods involving
industrial designs, patents, integrated circuits or trade secrets into free circulation on the
basis of a decision other than by a judicial or other independent authority; provided,
however, if the period set forth in paragraphs 6 through 8 has expired without the granting
of provisional relief by the duly empowered authority, and provided that all other conditions
for importation have been complied with, such Party shall permit the owner, importer or
consignee of such goods to receive such goods for entry into commerce on the posting of
a security in an amount sufficient to protect the right holder against any infringement.
Payment of such security shall not prejudice any other remedy available to the right holder,

-29-

10.

it being understood that the security shall be released if the right holder fails to pursue its
right of action within a reasonable period of time.

Each Party shall ensure that its customs administration will promptly notify the importer and
the applicant when the customs administration suspends the release of goods pursuant to
paragraph 1.

Each Party shall ensure that its customs administration will release goods from suspension
if within a period not exceeding 10 working days after the applicant under paragraph 1| has
been served notice of the suspension the customs administration has not been informed that:

A. a party other than the defendant has initiated proceedings leading to a decision on
the merits of the case, or

B. a competent authority has taken provisional measures prolonging the suspension,
provided that all other conditions for importation or exportation have been met.
Each Party shall provide that, in appropriate cases, the customs administration may
extend the suspension by another 10 working days.

Each Party shall ensure that if proceedings leading to a decision on the merits of the case
have been initiated, a review, including a right to be heard, shall take place on request of the
defendant with a view to deciding, within a reasonable period, whether the measures shall
be modified, revoked or confirmed.

Notwithstanding paragraphs 6 and 7, where the suspension of the release of goods 1s carried
out or continued in accordance with a provisional judicial measure, Article 13.6 of this
Chapter shall apply.

Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities have the authority to order the
applicant under paragraph | to pay the importer, the consignee and the owner of the goods
appropriate compensation for any injury caused to them through the wrongful detention of
goods or through the detention of goods released pursuant to paragraph 6.

Without prejudice to the protection of confidential information, each Party shall ensure that
its competent authorities have the authority to give the right holder sufficient opportunity
to have any goods detained by the customs administration inspected in order to substantiate
its claims. Each Party shall also ensure that its competent authorities have the authority to
give the importer an equivalent opportunity to have any such goods inspected. Where the
competent authorities have made a positive determination on the merits of a case, a Party
may provide the competent authorities the authority to inform the right holder of the names
and addresses of the consignor, the importer and the consignee, and of the quantity of the
goods in question.

-3()-

11.

12.

13.

Where a Party requires its competent authorities to act on their own initiative and to
suspend the release of goods in respect of which they have acquired prima facie evidence
that an intellectual property right is being infringed:

A. The competent authorities may at any time seek from the right holder any
information that might assist them to exercise these powers;

B. the importer and the right holder shall be promptly notified of the suspension by the
Party’s competent authorities, and where the importer lodges an appeal against the
suspension with competent authorities, the suspension shall be subject to the
conditions, with such modifications as may be necessary, set out in paragraphs 6
through 8; and

C. the Party may exempt public authorities and officials from liability, except when the
offending actions were not taken or intended in good faith.

Without prejudice to other rights of action open to the right holder and subject to the
defendant's right to seek judicial review, each Party shall provide that its competent
authorities shall have the authority to order the destruction or disposal of infringing goods
in accordance with the principles set out in Article 12.4 of this Chapter. In regard to
counterfeit trademark goods, the authorities shall not allow the re-exportation of the
infringing goods in an unaltered state or subject them to a different customs procedure,
other than in exceptional circumstances.

A Party may exclude from the application of paragraphs | through 12 small quantities of
goods of a non-commercial nature contained in travelers’ personal luggage or sent in small
consignments that are not repetitive.

Article 16
Existing Subject Matter

To the extent this Agreement requires a Party to increase its level of protection and enforcement
of intellectual property rights, it gives rise to obligations in respect of all subject matter existing at
the date of application of this Agreement for the Party in question, and which is protected in that
Party on the date the Agreement enters into force, or which meets or comes subsequently to meet
the criteria for protection under the terms of this Agreement. In respect of this Article, copyright
obligations with respect to existing works shall be solely determined under Article 18 of the Berne
Convention (1971), and obligations with respect to the rights of producers of phonograms and
performers in existing phonograms shall be determined solely under Article 18 of the Berne
Convention (1971), which is applied with such modifications as may be necessary.

-3]-

Article 17
Technical Cooperation

The Parties agree to enhance mutually beneficial cooperation in the field of intellectual
property rights. To this end, the United States agrees to provide Vietnam with technical
assistance to strengthen its regime for the protection and enforcement of intellectual
property rights. Such technical assistance shall be provided on mutually agreed terms and
is subject to the availability of appropriated funds. This assistance may be provided
through, or in conjunction with, private industry or international organisations.

Cooperative activities under this Article may be undertaken in the fields of intellectual
property described in Article 2.3 of this Chapter as well as the enforcement of intellectual
property rights. Cooperative activities under this Article may include, but are not limited
to, such activities as the exchange of experience and training of staff, and have the aim of
strengthening the legislative and regulatory framework in the field of intellectual property
law, strengthening the administration of intellectual property protection, and strengthening
the implementation and effective enforcement of intellectual property laws in Vietnam.

To assist in further strengthening its regime for the protection and enforcement of
intellectual property rights, Vietnam agrees to seek appropriate technical assistance from
relevant international organisations or other interested countries, organisations or agencies.

Article 18
Transitional Provisions

Vietnam agrees to implement fully the obligations of this Chapter within the following time
periods:

A. With respect to all obligations in Articles 6 and 7, twelve months from the date of
entry into force of this Agreement.

B. With respect to all obligations in Article 4 except the obligation in Article 4.4, and
with respect to all obligations in Article 9, eighteen months from the date of entry

into force of this Agreement.

C. With respect to the obligations in Articles 1.3.A, 1.3.E, 4.4 and 5, thirty months
from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

D. With respect to all obligations not referenced in sub-paragraphs 1.A, 1.B or 1.C of
this Article, twenty-four months from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

-372-

The United States agrees to implement fully the obligations of this Chapter upon entry into
force of this Agreement, with the exception of the obligations in Article 8 and Article 3.1
as regards the protection of layout designs (topographies) of integrated circuits, which shall
be implemented twenty-four months from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Vietnam shall comply fully with the obligations of this Chapter which coincide with those
of the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (1994)
upon its accession to the WTO, if such accession occurs before the expiration of the time
periods provided in paragraph 1 of this Article.

Each Party shall immediately comply with the obligations of this Chapter to the extent
possible under its existing laws, and shall not take any measures during the time periods
provided in paragraphs | and 2 that would result in a lesser degree of consistency with this
Chapter.

In case of any conflict between the provisions of this Agreement and The Agreement
between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of the
Socialist Republic of Vietnam on the Establishment of Copyright Relations, signed in Hanoi
on June 27, 1997, the provisions of this Agreement shall prevail to the extent of the conflict.

-33-

CHAPTER III
TRADE IN SERVICES

Article 1
Scope and Definition

This Chapter applies to measures by the Parties affecting trade in services.

For the purposes of this Chapter, trade in services is defined as the supply of a service:
A. from the territory of one Party into the territory of the other Party;

B. in the territory of one Party to the service consumer of the other Party;

C. by a service supplier of one Party, through commercial presence in the territory of
the other Party;

D. by a service supplier of one Party, through presence of natural persons of a Party
in the territory of the other Party.

For the purposes of this Chapter:
A. "measures by a Party" means measures taken by:
(1) central, regional or local governments and authorities; and

(ii) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central,
regional or local governments or authorities;

In fulfilling its obligations and commitments under this Chapter, each Party shall
take such reasonable measures as may be available to it to ensure their observance
by regional and local governments and authorities and non-governmental bodies
within its territory;

B. "services" includes any service in any sector except services supplied in the exercise
of governmental authority;

C. "a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority" means any service

which is supplied neither on a commercial basis, nor in competition with one or
more service suppliers.

34.

Article 2
Most-favoured-Nation Treatment

1. With respect to any measure covered by this Chapter, each Party shall accord immediately
and unconditionally to services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords to like services and service suppliers of any other country.

2. A Party may maintain a measure inconsistent with paragraph | provided that such a measure
is listed in Listing of Article 2 Exemptions in Annex G.

3. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be so construed as to prevent either Party from
conferring or according advantages to adjacent countries in order to facilitate exchanges
limited to contiguous frontier zones of services that are both locally produced and

consumed.
Article 3
Economic Integration
1. This Chapter shall not apply to advantages accorded by either Party by virtue of such

Party’s membership in, or having entered into, an agreement liberalising trade in services
between or among the parties to such an agreement, provided that such an agreement:

A. has substantial sectoral coverage,” and

B. provides for the absence or elimination of substantially all discrimination, in the
sense of Article 7, between or among the parties, in the sectors covered under
subparagraph (A), through:

1) elimination of existing discriminatory measures, and/or

il) prohibition of new or more discriminatory measures,

either at the entry into force of that agreement or on the basis of a reasonable time-
frame, except for measures permitted under Articles 1, 2, and 3 of Chapter VII.

2. A service supplier of any Party that is a juridical person constituted under the laws of a party
to an agreement referred to in paragraph 1 shall be entitled to treatment granted under such
agreement, provided that it engages in substantive business operations in the territory of the
parties to such agreement.

* This condition is understood in terms of number of sectors, volume of trade affected and
modes of supply. In order to meet this condition, agreements should not provide for the a priori
exclusion of any mode of supply.

-35-

Article 4
Domestic Regulation

In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Party shall ensure that all
measures of general application affecting trade in services are administered in a reasonable,
objective and impartial manner.

A.

Each Party shall maintain or institute as soon as practicable judicial, arbitral or
administrative tribunals or procedures which provide, at the request of an affected
service supplier, for the prompt review of, and where justified, appropriate remedies
for, administrative decisions affecting trade in services. Where such procedures are
not independent of the agency entrusted with the administrative decision concerned,
the Party shall ensure that the procedures in fact provide for an objective and
impartial review.

The provisions of subparagraph A shall not be construed to require a Party to
institute such tribunals or procedures where this would be inconsistent with its
constitutional structure or the nature of its legal system.

Where authorisation is required for the supply of a service on which a specific commitment
has been made, the competent authorities of a Party shall, within a reasonable period of time
after the submission of an application considered complete under domestic laws and
regulations, inform the applicant of the decision concerning the application. At the request
of the applicant, the competent authorities of the Party shall provide, without undue delay,
information concerning the status of the application.

A.

The Party shall not apply licensing and qualification requirements and technical
standards that nullify or impair such specific commitments in a manner which:

(1) does not comply with the following criteria:
(a) such requirements or standards shall be based on objective and
transparent criteria, such as competence and the ability to supply the

Service;

(b) such requirements or standards shall not be more burdensome than
necessary to ensure the quality of the service;

(c) in the case of licensing procedures, they shall not in themselves be
a restriction on the supply of the service.

-36-

(11) could not reasonably have been expected of that Party at the time the
specific commitments in those sectors were made.

B. In determining whether a Party is in conformity with the obligation under sub-
paragraph 4.A, account shall be taken of international standards of relevant
international organisations’ applied by that Party.

5. In sectors where specific commitments regarding professional services are undertaken, each
Party shall provide for adequate procedures to verify the competence of professionals of the
other Party.

Article 5
Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers

l. Each Party shall ensure that any monopoly supplier of a service in its territory does not, in
the supply of the monopoly service in the relevant market, act in a manner inconsistent with
that Party’s obligations under Article 2 and specific commitments.

2. Where a Party's monopoly supplier competes, either directly or through an affiliated
company, in the supply of a service outside the scope of its monopoly rights and which is
subject to that Party’s specific commitments, the Party shall ensure that such a supplier does
not abuse its monopoly position to act in its territory in a manner inconsistent with such
commitments.

3. The provisions of this Article shall also apply to cases of exclusive service suppliers, where
a Party, formally or in effect, (a) authorises or establishes a small number of service
suppliers and (5) substantially prevents competition among those suppliers in its territory.

> The term "relevant international organisations" refers to international bodies whose
membership is open to the relevant bodies of at least all Members of the WTO.

-37-

Article 6
Market Access

l. With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified in Article 1, each
Party shall accord services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions agreed and
specified in its Schedule in Annex G.*

2. In sectors where market-access commitments are undertaken, the measures which a Party
shall not maintain or adopt either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of
its entire territory, unless otherwise specified in its Schedule, are defined as:

A. limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the form of numerical
quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirements of an economic
needs test;

B. limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of

numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

C. limitations on the total number of service operations or on the total quantity of
service output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of
quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;°

D. limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a
particular service sector or that a service supplier may employ and who are
necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific service in the form of
numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

E. measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint venture
through which a service supplier may supply a service; and

* If a Party undertakes a market-access commitment in relation to the supply of a service
through the mode of supply referred to in subparagraph 2(A) of Article 1 and if the cross-border
movement of capital is an essential part of the service itself, that Party is thereby committed to allow such
movement of capital. If a Party undertakes a market-access commitment in relation to the supply of a
service through the mode of supply referred to in subparagraph 2(C) of Article 1, it is thereby committed
to allow related transfers of capital into its territory.

> Subparagraph 2(C) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of
services.

-38-

F, limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum percentage
limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign

investment.
Article 7
National Treatment
1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule in Annex G, and subject to any conditions and

qualifications set out therein, each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the
other Party, in respect of all measures affecting the supply of services, treatment no less
favourable than that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.°

2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to services and service
suppliers of the other Party, either formally identical treatment or formally different
treatment to that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.

3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less favourable if
it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services or service suppliers of the Party
compared to like services or service suppliers of the other Party.

Article 8
Additional Commitments

The Parties may negotiate commitments with respect to measures affecting trade in services not
subject to scheduling under Articles 6 or 7, including those regarding qualifications, standards or
licensing matters. Such commitments shall be inscribed in a Party’s Schedule.

Article 9
Schedules of Specific Commitments

1. Each Party shall set out in Annex G the specific commitments it undertakes under Articles
6 and 7 of this Chapter. With respect to sectors where such commitments are undertaken,
such Annex shall specify:

A. terms, limitations and conditions on market access;

° Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require either
Party to compensate for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of
the relevant services or service supplier.

-39-

B. conditions and qualifications on national treatment;

C. undertakings relating to additional commitments;
D. where appropriate the time-frame for implementation of such commitments; and
E. the date of entry into force of such commitments.

Measures inconsistent with both Articles 6 and 7 shall be inscribed in the column relating
to Article 6. In this case the inscription will be considered to provide a condition or
qualification to Article 7 as well.

Schedules of specific commitments shall be annexed to this Chapter and shall form an

integral part thereof.

Article 10
Denial of Benefits

A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter:

1.

to the supply of a service, if 1t establishes that the service is supplied from or in the territory
of a non-Party;

in the case of the supply of a maritime transport service, if applicable, if it establishes that
the service is supplied:

A. by a vessel registered under the laws of a non-Party, and

B. by a person which operates and/or uses the vessel in whole or in part but which is
of a non-Party;

to a service supplier that is a juridical person, if it establishes that it is not a service supplier

of the other Party.

Article 11
Definitions

For the purpose of this Chapter and Annex G:

1.

"measure" means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,
procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other form;

-A()-

2. "supply of a service" includes the production, distribution, marketing, sale and delivery of
a Service;

3. "measures by a Party affecting trade in services" include measures in respect of
A. the purchase, payment or use of a service;

B. the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a service, services which
are required by a Party to be offered to the public generally;

C. the presence, including commercial presence, of persons of a Party for the supply
of a service in the territory of another Party;

4. "commercial presence" means any type of business or professional establishment, including
through

A. the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical person, or
B. the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office,
within the territory of a Party for the purpose of supplying a service;

5. “sector” of a service means,

A. with reference to a specific commitment, one or more, or all, subsectors of that
service, as specified in a Party's Schedule,

B. otherwise, the whole of that service sector, including all of its subsectors;
6. "service of the other Party" means a service which is supplied,
A. from or in the territory of that other Party, or in the case of maritime transport, by

a vessel registered under the laws of that other Party, or by a person of that other
Party which supplies the service through the operation of a vessel and/or its use in
whole or in part; or

B. in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence or through the
presence of natural persons, by a service supplier of that other Party;

7. "service supplier" means any person that supplies a service;’

’ Where the service is not supplied directly by a juridical person but through other forms of
commercial presence such as a branch or a representative office, the service supplier (i.e. the juridical

-A]-

10.

11.

12.

13.

"monopoly supplier of a service" means any person, public or private, which in the relevant
market of the territory of a Party is authorised or established formally or in effect by that
Party as the sole supplier of that service;

"service consumer" means any person that receives or uses a service;

"person" means either a natural person or a juridical person;

"natural person of the other Party" means a natural person who resides in the territory of
that other Party, and who under the law of that other Party:

A.

B.

is a national of that other Party; or

has the right of permanent residence in that other Party, in the case of a Party which:

1) does not have nationals; or

il) accords substantially the same treatment to its permanent residents as it does
to its nationals in respect of measures affecting trade in services;

"juridical person" means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised under
applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or
governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole
proprietorship or association;

"juridical person of the other Party" means a juridical person which is either:

A.

constituted or otherwise organised under the law of the other Party, and is engaged
in substantive business operations in the territory of that Party; or

in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence, owned or
controlled by:

1) natural persons of that Party; or

il) juridical persons of that other Party identified under subparagraph (1);

person) shall, nonetheless, through such presence be accorded the treatment provided for service suppliers
under this Chapter. Such treatment shall be extended to the presence through which the service is
supplied and need not be extended to any other parts of the supplier located outside the territory where the
service is supplied.

-A2-

14.

15.

16.

a juridical person is:

A. "owned" by persons of a Party if more than 50 per cent of the equity interest in it
is beneficially owned by persons of that Party;

B. "controlled" by persons of a Party if such persons have the power to name a
majority of its directors or otherwise to legally direct its actions;

C. "affiliated" with another person when it controls, or is controlled by, that other
person; or when it and the other person are both controlled by the same person;

“company" means any entity constituted or organised under applicable law, whether or not
for profit, and whether privately or governmentally owned or controlled, and includes a
corporation, trust, partnership, sole proprietorship, branch, joint venture, association, or

other organisation;

“enterprise” means a company.

-A3-

CHAPTER IV

DEVELOPMENT OF INVESTMENT RELATIONS

Article 1
Definitions

For the purpose of this Chapter, Annex H, the exchanged letters on Investment Licensing Regime,
and, with respect to a covered investment, Articles 1 and 4 of Chapter VII:

1.

"investment" means every kind of investment in the territory of a Party owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the other Party, and includes investment
consisting or taking the form of:

A. a company or enterprise;

B. shares, stock, and other forms of equity participation, and bonds, debentures, and
other forms of debt interests, in a company;

C. contractual rights, such as under turnkey, construction or management contracts,
production or revenue sharing contracts, concessions, or other similar contracts;

D. tangible property, including real property, and intangible property, including rights,
such as leases, mortgages, liens and pledges;

E. intellectual property, including copyrights and related rights, trademarks, patents,
layout designs (topographies) of integrated circuits, encrypted program-carrying
satellite signals, confidential information (trade secrets), industrial designs and rights
in plant varieties; and

F. rights conferred pursuant to law, such as licenses and permits;

"company" means any entity constituted or organised under applicable law, whether or not
for profit, and whether privately or governmentally owned or controlled, and includes a
corporation, trust, partnership, sole proprietorship, branch, joint venture, association, or
other organisation;

"company of a Party" means a company constituted or organised under the laws of that

Party;

"covered investment" means an investment of a national or company of a Party in the
territory of the other Party;

-A4-

10.

11.

12.

13.

"state enterprise" means a company owned, or controlled through ownership interests, by
a Party;

"investment authorisation" means an authorisation granted by the foreign investment
authority of a Party to a covered investment or a national or company of the other Party;

"investment agreement" means a written agreement between the national authorities of a
Party and a covered investment or a national or company of the other Party that (1) grants
rights with respect to natural resources or other assets controlled by the national authorities
and (ii) the investment, national or company relies upon in establishing or acquiring a
covered investment;

"UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules" means the arbitration rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law;

"national" of a Party means a natural person who is a national of a Party under its applicable
law;

an "investment dispute" is a dispute between a Party and a national or company of the
other Party arising out of or relating to an investment authorisation, an investment
agreement or an alleged breach of any right conferred, created or recognised by this
Chapter, Annex H, the exchanged letters on Investment Licensing Regime, and Articles 1
and 4 of Chapter VII with respect to a covered investment;

“non-discriminatory” treatment means treatment that is at least as favourable as the better of
national treatment or most favoured nation treatment;

“ICSID Convention” means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States, done at Washington, March 18, 1965; and

“Centre” means the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes Established
by the ICSID Convention.

Article 2
National Treatment and Most-favoured Nation Treatment

With respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation
and sale or other disposition of covered investments, each Party shall accord treatment no
less favourable than that it accords, in like situations, to investments in its territory of its own
nationals or companies (hereinafter "national treatment") or to investments in its territory
of nationals or companies of a third country (hereinafter "most favoured nation treatment"),
whichever is most favourable (hereinafter "national and most favoured nation treatment").

-45-

Each Party shall ensure that its state enterprises, in the provision of their goods or services,
accord national and most favoured nation treatment to covered investments, subject to the
provisions of paragraph 4.3 of Annex H.

A. A Party may adopt or maintain exceptions to the obligations of paragraph 1 in the
sectors or with respect to the matters specified in Annex H to this Agreement. In
adopting such an exception, a Party may not require the divestment, in whole or in
part, of covered investments existing at the time the exception becomes effective.

B. The obligations of paragraph 1 do not apply to procedures provided in multilateral
agreements concluded under the auspices of the World Intellectual Property
Organisation relating to the acquisition or maintenance of intellectual property
rights.

Article 3
General Standard of Treatment

Each Party shall at all times accord to covered investments fair and equitable treatment and
full protection and security, and shall in no case accord treatment less favourable than that
required by applicable rules of customary international law.

Each Party shall in no way impair by unreasonable and discriminatory measures the
management, conduct, operation and sale or other disposition of covered investments.

Article 4
Dispute Settlement

Each Party shall provide companies and nationals of the other Party with an effective means
of asserting claims and enforcing rights with respect to covered investments.

In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute should attempt to resolve
the dispute through consultation and negotiation, which may include the use of non-binding
third-party procedures. Subject to paragraph 3 of this Article, if the dispute has not been
resolved through consultation and negotiations, a national or company of one Party that is
a party to an investment dispute may submit the dispute for resolution under one of the
following alternatives:

A. to the competent courts or administrative tribunals of the Party in the territory of
which the covered investment has been made; or

-A6-

B. in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute-settlement procedures;

or
C. in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.
A. Provided that the national or company concerned has not submitted the dispute for

resolution under sub-paragraph 2.A or B, and that ninety days have elapsed from the

date on which the dispute arose, the national or company concerned may submit the

dispute for settlement by binding arbitration:

(1) to the Centre, if both Parties are members of the ICSID Convention and the
Centre is available; or

(11) to the Additional Facility of the Centre, if the Additional Facility is available;
or

(iii) in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; or

(iv) if agreed by both parties to the dispute, to any other arbitration institution
or in accordance with any other arbitration rules.

B. A national or company, notwithstanding that it may have submitted a dispute to
binding arbitration under sub-paragraph 3.A, may seek interim injunctive relief, not
involving the payment of damages, before the judicial or administrative tribunals of
a Party, prior to the institution of the arbitral proceeding or during the proceeding,
for the preservation of rights and interests.

Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment dispute for settlement by
binding arbitration in accordance with the choice of the national or company under sub-
paragraph 3.A(i), (11), (411) or the mutual agreement of both parties to the dispute under sub-
paragraph 3.A(iv). This consent and the submission of the dispute by a national or company
under sub-paragraph 3.A shall satisfy the requirement of:

A. Article Il of the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement
of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958, for an "agreement
in writing;" and

B. Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and the Additional
Facility Rules for written consent of the parties to the dispute.

Any arbitration under sub-paragraph 3.A(i1), (111) and (iv) shall be held in a state that is a
party to the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958.

Any arbitral award rendered pursuant to this Chapter shall be final and binding on the

parties to the dispute. Each Party shall carry out without delay the provisions of any
such award and provide in its territory for the enforcement of such award. Each Party’s

-47-

enforcement of an arbitral award issued in its territory shall be governed by its national
law.

7. In any proceeding involving an investment dispute, a Party shall not assert, as a defence,
counterclaim, right of set-off, or for any other reason, that indemnification or other
compensation for all or part of the alleged damages has been received or will be received
pursuant to an insurance or guarantee contract.

8. For the purposes of this Article and of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention with
respect to a covered investment, a company of a Party that, immediately before the
occurrence of the event or events giving rise to an investment dispute, was a covered
investment, shall be treated as a company of the other Party.

Article 5
Transparency

Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations and administrative procedures of general
application that pertain to or affect investments, investment agreements, and investment
authorisations are promptly published or otherwise made publicly available.

Article 6
Special Formalities

This Chapter shall not preclude a Party from prescribing special formalities in connection with
covered investments, such as a requirement that such investments be legally constituted under the
laws and regulations of that Party, or a requirement that transfers of currency or other monetary
instruments be reported, provided that such formalities shall not impair the substance of any of the
rights set forth in this Chapter, Annex H, the exchanged letters on Investment Licensing Regime,
and, with respect to a covered investment, Articles 1 and 4 of Chapter VII.

Article 7
Technology Transfer

Neither Party shall mandate or enforce, as a condition for the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, management, conduct or operation of a covered investment, any requirement
(including any commitment or undertaking in connection with the receipt of a government
permission or authorisation) to transfer technology, a production process or other proprietary
knowledge except:

l. when applying generally applicable environmental laws that are consistent with the

-A8-

provisions of this Agreement; or

2. pursuant to an order, commitment or undertaking that is enforced by a court,
administrative tribunal or competition authority to remedy an alleged or adjudicated
violation of competition laws.

Article 8
Entry, Sojourn and Employment of Aliens

l. Each Party shall permit nationals and companies of the other Party to transfer employees
of any nationality, subject to the Party's laws relating to the entry and sojourn of aliens,
to their operations in the territory of the Party in the event that those employees are
executives or managers or possess specialised knowledge relating to those operations.

2. Each Party shall permit nationals and companies of the other Party to engage, within the
territory of that Party, top managerial personnel of their choice, regardless of nationality,
subject to the Party’s laws relating to the entry and sojourn of aliens.

3. The foregoing paragraphs shall not preclude a Party from applying its labor laws, so long
as they do not impair the substance of the rights granted under this Article.

Article 9
Preservation of Rights

This Chapter, Annex H, the exchanged letters on Investment Licensing Regime, and, with respect
to a covered investment, Articles 1 and 4 of Chapter VII, shall not derogate from any of the
following that entitle covered investments in like situations to treatment more favourable than that
accorded herein:

l. laws, regulations and administrative procedures, or administrative or adjudicatory decisions
of a Party;

2. international legal obligations; or,

3. obligations assumed by a Party, including those contained in an investment agreement or

investment authorisation.

Article 10

-AQ-

Expropriations and Compensation for War Damages

Neither Party shall expropriate or nationalise investments either directly or indirectly
through measures tantamount to expropriation or nationalisation ("expropriation”’) except
for a public purpose; in a non-discriminatory manner; upon payment of prompt, adequate
and effective compensation; and in accordance with due process of law and the general
principles of treatment provided for in Article 3. Compensation shall be equivalent to the
fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriatory
action was taken; be paid without delay; include interest at a commercially reasonable rate
from the date of expropriation; be fully realisable; and be freely transferable at the prevailing
market rate of exchange on the date of expropriation. The fair market value shall not
reflect any change in value occurring because the expropriatory action had become known
before the date of expropriation.

Each Party shall accord national and most favoured nation treatment to covered investments
as regards any measure relating to losses that investments suffer in its territory owing to war
or other armed conflict, revolution, state of national emergency, insurrection, civil
disturbance, or similar events.

Each Party shall accord restitution, or pay compensation in accordance with paragraph 1,
in the event that covered investments suffer from losses in its territory, owing to war or
other armed conflict, revolution, state of national emergency, insurrection, civil disturbance,
or similar events, that result from:

A. requisitioning of all or part of such investments by the Party's forces or authorities,
or
B. destruction of all or part of such investments by the Party's forces or authorities that

was not required by the necessity of the situation.

Article 11
Trade -Related Investment Measures

Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2, neither Party shall apply any trade-related
investment measures (TRIMs) which are inconsistent with the Agreement on Trade-
Related Investment Measures of the WTO. The illustrative list of TRIMs set forth in the
WTO Agreement on TRIMs (“the List’) is contained in Annex I of this Agreement.
TRIMs contained on the List will be considered inconsistent with this Article regardless
of whether they are imposed in laws, regulations, or as conditions for individual
investment contracts or licenses.

-5(0-

2. The Parties agree to eliminate all TRIMs (including those contained in laws, regulations,
contracts or licenses) which fall under sub-paragraphs 2(A) (trade balancing
requirements) and 2(B) (foreign exchange controls on imports) of the List by the time
this Agreement enters into force. Vietnam shall eliminate all other TRIMs no later than
five years after the date of entry into force of the Agreement, or the date required under
the terms and conditions of Vietnam's accession to the WTO, whichever occurs first.

Article 12
Application to State Enterprises
A Party's obligations shall apply to a state enterprise in the exercise of any regulatory,
administrative or other governmental authority delegated to it by that Party.
Article 13
Future Negotiation of Bilateral Investment Treaty
The Parties will endeavour to negotiate a bilateral investment treaty in good faith within a reasonable
period of time.
Article 14
Application to Covered Investments
The provisions of this Chapter, Annex H, the exchanged letters on Investment Licensing Regime,

and Articles 1 and 4 of Chapter VII shall apply to covered investments existing at the time of entry
into force as well as to those established or acquired thereafter.

Article 15
Denial of Benefits
Each Party reserves the right to deny to a company of the other Party the benefits of this
Chapter and Chapter V of this Agreement if nationals of a third country own or control the
company and

l. the denying Party does not maintain normal economic relations with the third country; or

2. the company has no substantial business activities in the territory of the Party under
whose laws it is constituted or organised.

-51-

CHAPTER V

BUSINESS FACILITATION

Article 1

To facilitate business activity, and subject to the provisions of Chapters I (including
Annexes A, B, C, D and E), III (including Annexes F and G) and IV (including Annexes
H and I) of this Agreement, each Party shall:

A.

permit nationals and companies of the other Party to import and use, in
accordance with normal commercial practices, office and other equipment, such
as typewriters, photocopiers, computers and facsimile machines in connection
with the conduct of their activities in the territory of such Party;

subject to its laws and procedures governing immigration and foreign missions,
permit, on a nondiscriminatory basis and at market prices, nationals and
companies of the other Party access to and use of office space and living
accommodations;

subject to its laws, regulations and procedures governing immigration and
foreign missions, permit nationals and companies of the other Party to engage
agents, consultants and distributors of either Party, on prices and terms mutually
agreed between the parties, for their production and covered investments;

permit nationals and companies of the other Party to advertise their products and
services (1) through direct agreement with the advertising media, including
television, radio, print and billboard, and (11) by direct mail, including the use of
enclosed envelopes and cards pre-addressed to that national or company;

encourage direct contact, and permit direct sales, between nationals and
companies of the other Party and end-users and other customers of their goods
and services, and encourage direct contacts with agencies and organisations
whose decisions will affect potential sales;

permit nationals and companies of the other Party to conduct market studies,
either directly or by contract, within its territory;

permit nationals and companies of the other Party to stock an adequate supply of
samples and replacement parts for after-sales service for covered investment

products; and

provide non-discriminatory access to governmentally-provided products and

-52-

services, including public utilities, to nationals and companies of the other Party
at fair and equitable prices (and in no event at prices greater than those charged
to any nationals or companies of third countries where such prices are set or
controlled by the government in connection with the operation of their
commercial representations).

Article 2

For purposes of this Chapter, the term “nondiscriminatory” means treatment that is at
least as favourable as the better of national treatment or most favoured nation treatment.

Article 3
In case of conflict between any provision of this Chapter and any provision of Chapters I
(including Annexes A, B, C, D and E), III (including Annexes F and G) and IV

(including Annexes H and I), the provision of the Chapters I, III and IV shall control to
the extent of the conflict.

-53-

CHAPTER VI
TRANSPARENCY-RELATED PROVISIONS AND RIGHT TO APPEAL
Article 1

Each Party shall publish on a regular and prompt basis all laws, regulations and
administrative procedures of general application pertaining to any matter covered by this
Agreement. Publication of such information and measures will be in a manner which
enables governmental agencies, enterprises and persons engaged in commercial activity to
become acquainted with them before they come into effect and to apply them in accordance
with their terms. Each such publication shall include the effective date of the measure, the
products (by tariff line) or services affected by the measure, and all authorities that must
approve or be consulted in the implementation of the measure, and provide a contact point
within each authority from which relevant information can be obtained.

Article 2

Each Party shall provide nationals and companies of the other Party with access to data on
the national economy and individual sectors, including information on foreign trade. The
provisions of this paragraph and the preceding paragraph do not require disclosure of
confidential information which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to
the public interest, or would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular
enterprises, public or private. For the purposes of this Agreement, confidential information
that would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises means
specific information concerning the importation of a product that would have a significant
adverse effect on the price or quantity available of such product, but shall not include
information required to be disclosed under the agreements administered by the WTO.

Article 3

Each Party shall allow, to the extent possible, the other Party and its nationals the
opportunity to comment on the formulation of laws, regulations and administrative
procedures of general application that may affect the conduct of business activities
covered by this Agreement.

Article 4

All laws, regulations and administrative procedures of general application referred to in
paragraph 1 of this Article that are not published and readily available to other governments
and persons engaged in commercial activities as of the date of signature of this Agreement
will be made public and readily and quickly available. Only laws, regulations and
administrative procedures of general application that are published and readily available to

-54-

other governments and persons engaged in commercial activity will be enforced and
enforceable.

Article 5

The Parties shall have or designate an official journal or journals and all measures of general
application shall be published in such journals. The Parties will publish such journals on a
regular basis and make copies of them readily available to the public.

Article 6

The Parties shall administer, in a uniform, impartial and reasonable manner all their
respective laws, regulations and administrative procedures of general application of all the
types described in paragraph 1 of this Article.

Article 7

The Parties will maintain administrative and judicial tribunals and procedures for the
purpose, inter alia, of the prompt review and correction (upon the request of an affected
person) of administrative action relating to matters covered by this Agreement. These
procedures shall include the opportunity for appeal, without penalty, by persons affected by
the relevant decision. If the initial right of appeal is to an administrative body, there shall
also be the opportunity for appeal of the decision to a judicial body. Notice of the decision
on appeal shall be given to the appellant and the reasons for such decision shall be provided
in writing. The appellant shall also be informed of the right to any further appeal.

Article 8
The Parties shall ensure that all import licensing procedures, both automatic and
non-automatic, are implemented in a transparent and predictable manner, and in

accordance with the standards of the WTO Agreement on Import Licensing
Procedures.

-55-

CHAPTER VII

GENERAL ARTICLES

Article 1
Cross-Border Transactions and Transfers

Unless otherwise agreed between the parties to such transactions, all cross-border
commercial transactions, and all transfers of currencies relating to a covered investment,
shall be made in United States dollars or any other currency that may be designated from
time to time by the International Monetary Fund as being a freely usable currency.

In connection with trade in products and services, each Party shall grant to nationals and
companies of the other Party the better of most-favoured-nation or national treatment with
respect to:

A. opening and maintaining accounts, in both local and foreign currency, and having
access to funds deposited in financial institutions located in the territory of the Party;

B. payments, remittances and transfers of currencies convertible into freely usable
currency at a market rate of exchange or financial instruments representative
thereof, between the territories of the two Parties, as well as between the territory
of that Party and that of any third country;

C. rates of exchange and related matters, including access to freely usable currencies.
Each Party shall grant to covered investments of the other Party the better of national or
most favoured nation treatment with respect to all transfers into and out of each Party's
territory. Such transfers include:

A. contributions to capital;

B. profits, dividends, capital gains, and proceeds from the sale of all or any part of the
investment or from the partial or complete liquidation of the investment;

C. interest, royalty payments, management fees, and technical assistance and other fees;
D. payments made under contract, including a loan agreement;
E. compensation pursuant to Article 10 of Chapter IV and payments arising out of an

investment dispute.

-56-

4. In all cases, treatment of cross-border transactions and transfers will be consistent with each
Party’s obligations to the International Monetary Fund.

5. Each Party shall permit returns in kind to be made as authorised or specified in an
investment authorisation, investment agreement, or other written agreement between the
Party and a covered investment or a national or company of the other Party.

6. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 through 5, a Party may prevent a transfer through the
equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith applications (including the seeking of
preliminary relief, such as judicial injunctions and temporary restraining orders) of its law
relating to:

A. bankruptcy, insolvency or the protection of the rights of creditors;

B. issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options, or derivatives;
C. reports or records of transfers;
D. criminal or penal offences; or
E. ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or administrative
proceedings.
7. The provisions of this Article relating to financial transfers shall not preclude:
A a requirement that a national or company (or its covered investment) comply with

customary banking procedures and regulations, provided that they do not impair the
substance of the rights granted under this Article;

B. prudential measures in order to protect the interests of creditors and to ensure the
stability and integrity of the national financial system.

Article 2
National Security

This Agreement shall not preclude a Party from applying measures that it considers to be necessary
for the protection of its own essential security interests. Nothing in this Agreement shall be
construed to require either Party to furnish any information, the disclosure of which it considers
contrary to its essential security interests.

-57-

Article 3
General Exceptions

Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where like
conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade, nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed to prohibit the adoption or enforcement by either Party of
measures:

A. with respect to Chapter I, Trade in Goods, necessary to secure compliance with
laws or regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including
measures related to the protection of intellectual property rights and the prevention

of deceptive practices;

B. with respect to Chapter I, Trade in Goods, referred to in Article XX of the GATT
1994; or

C. with respect to Chapter HI, Trade in Services, referred to in Article XIV of the
GATS.

Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude a Party from applying its laws in respect of foreign
missions as set forth in applicable legislation.

Nothing in this Agreement limits the application of any existing or future agreements
between the Parties on trade in textiles and textile products.
Article 4

Taxation

No provision of this Agreement shall impose obligations with respect to tax matters, except
that:

A. Chapter I, other than Article 2.1 of such Chapter, shall apply only to taxes other
than direct taxes as defined in paragraph 3 of this Article.

B. Within Chapter IV,
1) Articles 4 and 10.1 will apply with respect to expropriation; and

11) Article 4 will apply with respect to an investment agreement or an
investment authorisation.

-58-

With respect to the application of Chapter IV, Article 10.1, an investor that asserts that a
tax measure involves an expropriation may submit that dispute to arbitration pursuant to
Chapter IV, Article 4.3, provided that the investor concerned has first referred to the
competent tax authorities of both Parties the issue of whether that tax measure involves an
expropriation. However, the investor cannot submit the dispute to arbitration if, within nine
months after the date of referral, the competent tax authorities of both Parties determine
that the tax measure does not involve an expropriation.

“Direct taxes” comprise all taxes on total income, on total capital or on elements of income
or of capital, including taxes on gains from the alienation of property, taxes on estates,
inheritances and gifts, and taxes on the total amounts of wages or salaries paid by
enterprises, as well as taxes on capital appreciation.

Article 5
Consultations

The Parties agree to consult periodically to review the operation of this Agreement.

The Parties agree to consult promptly as arranged through appropriate channels at the
request of either Party to discuss any matter concerning the interpretation or implementation
of this Agreement and other relevant aspects of the relations between the Parties.

The Parties agree to establish a Joint Committee (“Committee”) on Development of
Economic and Trade Relations between Vietnam and the United States of America. The
Committee’s responsibilities shall include the following:

A. monitoring and securing the implementation of this Agreement and making
recommendations to achieve the objectives of this Agreement;

B. ensuring that a satisfactory balance of concessions is maintained during the life of
this Agreement;

C. serving as the appropriate channel through which the Parties shall consult at the
request of either Party to discuss and resolve matters arising from interpretation or
implementation of this Agreement; and

D. seeking and making proposals on the enhancement and diversification of economic
and trade relations between the two countries.

The Committee shall be co-chaired by representatives of the Parties at the ministerial level,

and have members who are representatives from the relevant agencies concerned with the
implementation of this Agreement. The Committee shall meet annually or at the request of

-59-

either Party. The location of the meetings shall alternate between Hanoi and Washington
D.C., unless the Parties agree otherwise. The organisation and the terms of reference of the
Committee shall be adopted by the Committee at its first session.

Article 6
Relationship between Chapter IV, Annex H, Exchanged Letters, and Annex G

As to any matter concerning investment in services not specified in Annex G, the provisions of
Annex H shall apply. However, in the event of a conflict between a provision set forth in Chapter
IV, Annex H, or exchanged letters on Investment Licensing Regime, and a provision set forth in
Annex G, the provision set forth in Annex G shall prevail to the extent of the conflict. Annex H and
exchanged letters on Investment Licensing Regime shall not be construed or applied in a manner
that would deprive a Party of rights provided under Annex G.

Article 7
Annexes, Schedules and Exchanged Letters

The Annexes, Schedules, and the exchanged letters on Investment Licensing Regime to this
Agreement constitute an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 8
Final Provisions, Entry into Force, Duration, Suspension and Termination

l. This Agreement shall enter into force on the day on which the Parties have exchanged
notifications that each has completed the legal procedures necessary for this purpose, and
shall remain in force for three years.

2. This Agreement shall be extended for successive terms of three years if neither Party notifies
the other Party of its intent to terminate this Agreement at least 30 days before the end of
a term.

3. If either Party does not have domestic legal authority to carry out its obligations under this

Agreement, either Party may suspend application of this Agreement, or, with agreement of
the other Party, any part of this Agreement, including MFN treatment. In that event, the
Parties will seek, to the fullest extent practicable under domestic law, to minimise
unfavourable effects on existing trade relations between the Parties.