Desiring-to establish mutually beneficial and equitable trade relations on ‘the basis of
mutual respect;

Acknowledging that the adoption of and compliance with international trade norms and

standards (including those of the World Trade Organisation) by the Parties will aid the

development of mutually beneficial trade relations, and should be the underlying basis of those
relations;

Recognising the importance of fostering an open and predictable environment for
international trade and investment;

Recognising the benefits to each Party resulting from increased international trade and
investment, and agreeing that trade-distorting investment measures and protectionism could
deprive the Parties of such benefits;

Taking into account the need to eliminate non-tariff barriers in order to facilitate greater
access to the markets of both countries;

Acknowledging the importance of intellectual property rights protection to economic
development and growth; ;

Acknowledging that the development of trade relations and direct contact between
nationals and companies of both Parties will promote openness and mutual understanding:

Considering that expanded trade relations between the Parties will contribute to the
general well-being of the peoples of each Party;

Having agreed that economic ties are an important and necessary element in the
strengthening of their bilateral relations; and

Being convinced that an agreement on trade relations between the two Parties will best

serve their mutual interests. | . Le

Have agreed as follows:

CHAPTER I

TRADE

ARTICLE 1

Most-favoured-nation and Nondiscriminatory Treatment

I. - Each Party shall accord unconditionally to products originating in or exported to the
territory of the other Party treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like products
originating in or exported to the territory of any third country in all matters relating to:

(a)

(f)

customs duties and charges of any kind imposed on or in connection with
importation or exportation, including the method of levying such duties and
charges;

methods of payment for imports and exports, and the international transfer of
such payments;

tules and formalities in connection with importation and exportation, including
those relating to customs clearance, transit, warehouses and transshipment;

taxes and other internal charges of any kind applied directly or indirectly to
imported products;

laws, regulations and requirements affecting the sale, offering for sale,
purchase, transportation, distribution, storage and use of products in the
domestic market; and

the application of quantitative restrictions and the granting of licenses.

2. Each Party shall accord unconditionally to products and services originating in the
territory of the other Party treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like products and
services originating in the territory of any third country with respect to the allocation of and
access to the currency needed to pay for such imports. ;

3, The provisions of section 1 and 2 of this Article shall not preclude action by either
Party which is required or specifically permitted by the Agreement Establishing the World
Trade Organisation (the "WTO Agreement"), or by any legal instrument under the WTO
Agreement, during such time as such Party is a Member of the World Trade Organisation.

TH

Similarly, the provisions of sections 1 and 2 shall not apply to-special advantages accorded by
virtue of the WTO Agreement.

4. The provisions of sections 1 and 2 of this Article shall not apply to:

(a) advantages accorded by either Party by virtue of such Party's full membership 4 in a
customs union or free trade area; and

(b) advantages accorded to adjacent countries for the facilitation of frontier traffic.

5. The provisions of section 2 of this Article shall not apply to trade in textiles and textile
products.

“ARTICLE 2
National Treatment
For the purposes of Chapter I of this Agreement:

1. Each Party shall administer tariff and nontariff measures affecting trade in a manner
which affords, with respect to both third country and domestic competitors, meaningful
competitive opportunities for products of the other Party.

2. Accordingly, neither Party shall impose, directly or indirectly, on the products of the
other Party imported into its territory, internal taxes or charges of any kind in excess of those
applied, directly or indirectly, to like domestic products.

3. Each Party shall accord to products originating in the territory of the other Party
treatment no, less favourable than that accorded to like domestic products in respect of all laws,
regulations and. requirements affecting their internal sale, offering for Sale, purchase,
transportation, distribution, storage or use. ~

4. In addition to the obligations of sections 2 and 3 of this Article, the charges and
measures described in sections 2 and 3 of this Article shall not otherwise be applied to
imported or domestic products so as to afford protection to domestic production.

5. The Parties shall ensure that technical regulations and standards are not prepared,
adopted or applied with a view to creating obstacles to international trade or to protect
domestic production. Furthermore, each Party shall accord products imported from the territory
of the other Party treatment no less favourable than the better of the treatment accorded to like
domestic products or like products originating in any third country in relation to such technical regulations or standards, including conformity testing and certification. Accordingly, the Parties shall:

ensure that any sanitary or phytosanitary measure is applied only to the extent
necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health, is based on scientific
principles and is not maintained without sufficient evidence (ie., a risk
assessment), taking into account the availability of relevant scientific
information and regional conditions, such as pest free zones; and

ensure that technical regulations are not prepared, adopted or applied with a
view to or with the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to international
trade. For this purpose, technical regulations shall not be more trade-restrictive
than necessary to fulfil a legitimate objective, taking into account of the risks

- non-fulfilment would create. Such legitimate objectives include national
security requirements; the prevention of deceptive practices; protection of
human health or safety, animal or plant life or health, or the environment. In
assessing such risks, relevant elements of consideration include available
scientific and technical information, related processing technology or intended
end-uses of products.

6. The Parties shall grant, in accordance with the requirements of national treatment, the

right to all individuals and entities to engage in foreign trade of goods (both import and
export). Trading rights shall be granted without the requirement to invest in a Party or produce
or purchase locally and shall be granted to foreign and domestic individuals and enterprises.

7. If a Party has not acceded to the International Convention on the Harmonised
Commodity Description and Coding System, it will undertake every reasonable effort to do so
as soon as possible, but in any event no later than by December 31, 2004-.:

ARTICLE 3

General Obligations with Respect to Trade

1. The Parties shall seek to achieve a satisfactory balance of market access opportunities
through the satisfactory reciprocation of reductions in tariffs and nontariff barriers to trade in
goods resulting from multilateral negotiations. To this end, each Party shall:

(a) except as specifically provided in its Annex A to this Agreement, eliminate all
import and export restrictions, quotas, licensing requirements, and controls for all product categories, other than those that would be permitted by Articles XX
and XXI of the GATT 1994;)

(b) eliminate all import substitution regulations, guidance and policies;

(c) limit all fees and charges of whatever character (other than import and export
duties and other taxes within the purview of Article II of this Agreement)
imposed on or in connection with importation or exportation to an amount
approximate to the cost of services rendered, and ensure that such fees and
charges do not represent an indirect protection to domestic products or a
taxation of imports or exports for fiscal purposes;
adopt a system of customs valuation based on the transaction value of the
imported merchandise on which duty is assessed, or of like merchandise, rather
than on the value of merchandise of national origin or on arbitrary or fictitious
values, with the transaction value being the price actually paid or payable for
the goods when sold for export to the country of importation in accordance with
the standards established in the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of
the GATT 1994; and >

ensure that the fees and charges referred to in subparagraph (c) and the customs
valuation system referred to in subparagraph (d) are imposed or implemented
uniformly and consistently throughout each Party's customs territory.

2. The Parties shall provide tariff treatment to products originating in the customs territory
of the other Party no less favourable than provided for by the provisions of its Annex B to this
Agreement.

3. Neither Party shall require its nationals or companies to engage in barter or counter
trade transactions with nationals or companies of the other Party. Nevertheless, where nationals
or companies decide to resort to barter or counter trade operations, the Parties may furnish
them information to facilitate the transaction and assist them as they would other export and
import operations. ——

' To the extent that import quotas remain, the Parties will publish no later than ninety (90) days after Signature of the

Agreement a list of all organisations, including those organisations delegated such authority by the Party, that are responsible
for authorising or approving imports whether through grant of license or other approval. Procedures for obtaining these import
licenses and approvals and the criteria for deciding whether a license should be granted will also be published. The Parties will
also ensure that the issuance of import licenses are not conditioned on the transfer of technology, meeting requirements related
to investment in their territories, or the existence or nature of domestic suppliers of such products or services.

TH

4. After the entry into force of this Agreement, and upon the request of the Lao PDR, the
United States will give due consideration to the eligibility of Laos for beneficiary developing
country status in accordance with the U.S. statutes implementing the Generalised System of
Preferences. |

ARTICLE 4

Transparency and Right to Appeal

1. Each Party shall publish on a regular and prompt basis all laws, regulations, rules,
decrees, administrative guidance, interpretative rulings, practices, and policies pertaining to the
classification or valuation of products for customs purposes; or to rates of duty, taxes or other
charges; or to requirements, restrictions or prohibitions on imports or exports or the transfer of
payments therefore; or affecting the sale, distribution, transportation, insurance, warehousing,
manufacture, use, inspection, exhibition, processing, mixing or other use of imports or exports;
or otherwise related to commercial activity, including trade, investment, intellectual property,
taxation, banking, telecommunications, insurance and other financial services, transport,
distribution, retail sale, manufacturing, and labor. Such information will include among, other
things the quantity or value to be imported of any product subject to quantitative restriction, the
types of products intended to be imported, and other relevant commercial information, such as
projects which could involve imported products. Publication of such information and measures
will be in a manner which enables governments persons engaged in commercial activity to
become acquainted with them before they come into effect and to apply them in accordance
with their terms.

2. Each Party shall provide nationals and companies of the other Party with access to data
on the national economy and individual sectors, including information on foreign trade. The
requirements of this paragraph and the preceding paragraph do not require disclosure of
confidential information which would impede law enforcement other otherwise be contrary to
the public interest or would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular
enterprises, public or private. For the purposes of this Agreement, confidential information that
would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises means specific
information concerning the importation of a product that would have a significant adverse
effect on the price or quantity available of such product, but shall not include information
required to be disclosed under the WTO Agreement. .

3. Each Party shall allow,.to the extent possible, the other Party and its nationals the
opportunity to comment on the formulation of rules and regulations which affect the conduct of
_ business activities covered by this Agreement.

4. All laws, regulations, rules, decrees, administrative guidance, interpretative rulings,
practices, and policies referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article that are not published and
readily available to other governments and persons engaged in commercial activities as of the
date of signature of this Agreement will be made public and readily and quickly er

cant (cai

Only laws, regulations, rules, degrees, administrative guidance, interpretative rulings,
practices, and policies that are published and readily available to other governments and
persons engaged in commercial activity will be enforced and enforceable.

5. Publication of each new law, regulation, rule, decree, administrative guidance,
interpretative ruling, practice, and policy governing matters set forth in paragraph 1 shall take
place before the related measure is effective. Each such publication shall include the effective
date of the measure, the products (by tariff line) or services affected by the measure, and all
authorities that. must approve or be consulted in the implementation of the measure, and
provide a contact point within each authority from which relevant information can be obtained.

6. The Parties shall have or designate an official journal or journals and all measures of
general application shall be published in such journals. The Parties will publish such journals
on a regular basis and make copies of them readily available to the public.

7. The Parties shall administer in a uniform, impartial and reasonable manner all their
respective laws, regulations, rules, decrees, administrative guidance, interpretative rulings,
practices, and policies of the type described in paragraph 1.

8. The Parties will maintain administrative and judicial bodies and procedures for the
purpose, inter alia, of the prompt review and correction of administrative action relating to
customs matters, including customs valuation, or any other matters regarding quantitative
restrictions on imports (other than textile products). These procedures shall include the
opportunity for appeal, without penalty, by persons affected by the relevant decision. If the
initial right of appeal is to an administrative body, there shall also be the opportunity for appeal
of the decision to a judicial body. Notice of the decision on appeal shall be given to the
appellant and the reasons for such decision shall be provided in writing. The appellant shall
also be informed of the right to any further appeal.

ARTICLE 5
Expansion and Promotion of Trade

l. The Parties affirm their desire to expand trade in products and services consistent with
the terms of this Agreement. They shall take appropriate measures to encourage and facilitate
‘trade in goods and services and to secure favourable conditions for long-term development of
trade relations between their respective nationals and companies. .

2. The Parties shall take appropriate measures to encourage the expansion of commercial
contacts with a view to increasing trade. Toward this end, the Parties shall publicise this
Agreement and ensure that it is made available to all interested parties. Low

THA

o™

3. Each Party shall encourage and facilitate the holding of trade promotional events such
as fairs, exhibitions, missions and seminars in its territory and in the territory of the other
Party. Similarly, each Party shall encourage and facilitate the participation of its respective
nationals and companies in such events. Subject to the laws in force within their respective
territories, the Parties agree to allow the import and re-export on a duty free basis of all articles
for use in such events, provided that such articles are not sold or otherwise transferred.

ARTICLE 6

Government Commercial Offices

1, Subject to its laws and regulations governing foreign missions, each Party shall allow
government commercial offices to hire directly host-country nationals and, subject to

immigration laws and procedures, third-country nationals.

2. Each Party shall ensure unhindered access of host-country nationals to government
commercial offices of the other Party.

3. Each Party shall encourage the participation of its nationals and companies in the
activities of the other Party's government commercial offices, especially with respect to events
held on the premises of such commercial offices.

4, Each Party shall encourage and facilitate access by government commercial office
personnel of the other Party to host-country officials at both the national and subnational level,
and to representatives of nationals and companies of the host Party.

ARTICLE 7

Financial Provisions Relating to
Trade in Products and Services’

1. Unless otherwise agreed between the parties to such transactions, all commercial
transactions shall be made in United States dollars or any other currency that may be
designated from time to time by the International Monetary Fund as being a freely usable
currency.

2. Neither Party shall restrict the transfer from its territory of convertible currencies or

deposits, or instruments representative thereof, obtained in connection with trade in products
and services by nationals and companies of the other Party provided that nationals and
companies of the other Party may be required to comply with administrative =

THAD

such repatriation; and provided further that such formalities may not constitute a restriction on
payments or transfers for current transactions.

3. Without derogation from section 2 of this Article, in connection with trade in products
and services, each Party shall grant to nationals and companies of the other Party most-
favoured-nation or national treatment, whichever is most favourable, with respect to:

(a) opening and maintaining accounts, in both local and foreign currency, and
having access to funds deposited in financial institutions located in the territory
of the’ Party provided that nationals and companies of the other Party may be
required to comply with administrative formalities for such repatriation; and
provided further that such formalities may not constitute -a restriction on
payments or transfers for current transactions;

payments, remittances and transfers of convertible currencies, or financial
instruments representative thereof, between the territories of the two Parties, as
well as between the territory of that Party and that of any third country provided
that nationals and companies of the other Party may be required to comply with
administrative formalities for such repatriation; and: provided further that such
formalities may not constitute a restriction on payments or transfers for current
transactions; and

rates of exchange and related matters, including access to freely’ usable
currencies.

ARTICLE 8

Areas for Further Economic and Technical Cooperation

1. The Parties shall take appropriate steps to foster economic and technical cooperation on
as broad a base as possible in all fields deemed to be in their mutual interest.

2. The Parties, taking into account the growing economic significance of service
industries, shall consult on matters affecting the conduct of service business between the two
countries and particular matters of mutual interest relating to individual service sectors with the
_ objective, among others, of attaining maximum possible market access and liberalisation.

ie

ARTICLE 9

Emergency Action on Imports

1. If, as a result of unforeseen developments and of the effect of the, obligations incurred
by a Party under the agreements administered by the WTO or this Agreement, including tariff
concessions, any product is being imported into the territory of that Party in such increased
quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten’ serious injury to domestic
producers in that territory of like or directly competitive products, the Party shall be free, in
respect of such product, and to the extent and for such time as may be necessary to prevent or
remedy such injury, to suspend’ the obligation in whole or in part or to withdraw or modify the
concession.

2. Before a Party shall take action pursuant to the provisions of section 1 of this Article, if
the other Party has a substantial interest as exporter of the product concerned, then the
importing Party shall afford the other Party an opportunity to consult with it in respect of the
proposed action. In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage which it would be
difficult to repair, action under section 1 of this Article may be taken provisionally without
prior notice or consultation, on the condition that consultations shall be effected immediately
after taking such action.

3. Unless a different solution is mutually agreed upon during the consultations, the
importing Party shall be free to take or continue action under section 1 of this Article. In that
event, the other Party shall be free to deviate from its obligations under this Agreement with
respect to substantially equivalent trade. v

4. The Parties acknowledge that the elaboration of the market disruption safeguard
provisions in this Article is without prejudice to the right of either Party to apply it laws and
regulations applicable to trade in textiles and textile products and its laws and regulations
applicable to unfair trade, including antidumping and countervailing duty laws. |

ARTICLE 10

Commercial Disputes
For the purposes of Chapter I of this Agreement:

1. Nationals and companies of either Party shall be accorded national treatment with
respect to access to all courts and administrative bodies in the territory of the other Party, as
plaintiffs, defendants or otherwise. They shall not be entitled to claim or enjoy immunity from
suit or execution of judgment, proceedings for the recognition and enforcement >

awards, or other liability in the territory of the other Party with respect to commercial
transactions; they also shall not claim or enjoy immunities from taxation with respect to
commercial transactions, except as may be provided in other bilateral agreements.

2. The Parties encourage the adoption of arbitration for the settlement of disputes arising
out of commercial transactions concluded between nationals or companies of the United States
of America and nationals or companies of the Lao PDR. Such arbitration may be provided for
by agreements in contracts between such nationals and companies, or in separate written
agreements between them.

3. Nationals and companies of either Party which have thus agreed to arbitration (the
“parties”) may provide for arbitration under any internationally recognised arbitration rules,
including the UNCITRAL Rules of December 15, 1976, and any modifications thereto. If
arbitration is to be conducted under the UNCITRAL Rules, an Appointing Authority should be
designated pursuant to the UNCITRAL Rules in a country other than the United States of
America or the Lao PDR.

4, Unless otherwise agreed between the parties, the parties should specify as the place of
arbitration a country other than the United States of America or the Lao PDR, that is a party to
the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New
York, June 10,1958.

5. Nothing in this. Article shall be construed to prevent, and the Parties shall not prohibit,
the parties from agreeing upon any other form of arbitration or on the law to be applied in such
arbitration, or other forms of dispute settlement which they mutually prefer and agree best suits
their particular needs.

6. Each Party shall ensure that an effective means exists within its territory for the
recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards. .

ARTICLE 11
State Trading and Industrial Subsidies

1. To the extent either Party establishes or maintains a State enterprise, or grants to any
enterprise, formally or in effect, exclusive or special privileges, it shall ensure that such
_ enterprise shall, in its purchases or sales involving either imports or exports, act in a manner
consistent with the general principles of non-discriminatory treatment prescribed in this
Agreement for governmental measures affecting imports or exports by private traders. |

2: The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall be understood to require that such
enterprises shall, having due regard to the other provisions of this Agreement, make "Sy

Pte Lf

purchases or sales solely in accordance with commercial considerations, including price,
quality, availability, marketability, transportation and other conditions of purchase or sale, and
shall afford the enterprises of the other Party adequate opportunity, in accordance with
customary business practice, to compete for participation in such purchase or sales.

3. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to imports of products for
immediate or ultimate consumption in government use and not otherwise for resale or use in
the production of goods for sale. With respect to such imports, each Party shall accord to the
trade of the other Party fair and equitable treatment.

4. Neither Party may grant or maintain subsidies contingent, in law or_in fact, whether
solely or as one of several other conditions, upon the recipient meeting any export performance
or import substitution requirement, including subsidies to state enterprises and to firms located

in export processing zones.

ARTICLE 12
Government Procurement

The Parties shall make readily available to the public and foreign entities procedures
and criteria for tendering all central-government level procurement with a value above two
hundred thousand U.S. dollars. This shall include, among other things, making readily
available to the public all procedures for bidding or otherwise applying for such tenders, and
all the criteria on which such bids or applications will be judged including pre-qualification
and short listing, if any. These materials shall be made available as far in advance as is
necessary to allow interested suppliers a meaningful opportunity to submit responsive bids.
Contracts shall be awarded strictly on the basis of criteria identified publicly. Notice of
evaluation results, invitations to negotiate contracts, and the monetary value of final contracts
and amounts paid once contracts are performed shall be made available to all bidders to ensure
fairness and transparency.

CHAPTER II
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS |
ARTICLE 13
Nature and Scope of Obligations

1. Each Party shall provide in its territory to the nationals of the other Party adequate and
effective protection and ‘enforcement of intellectual property rights, while ensuring that
measures to protect and enforce intellectual property rights do not themselves become barriers
to legitimate trade. a |
2. To provide adequate and effective protection and enforcement of intellectual property
rights, each Party shall, at a minimum, give effect to this Agreement and the substantive
economic provisions of:

(a) the Geneva Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms Against
Unauthorised Duplication of their phonograms, 1971(Geneva Convention),

(b) — the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 1971
(Berne Convention);

(c) the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, 1967 (Paris
Convention);

the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants, 1978
(UPOV Convention), or the International Convention for the Protection of New
Varieties of Plants, 1991 (UPOV Convention); and

(e) the Convention Relating to the Distribution of Programme-Carrying Signals Transmitted by Satellite (1974).

If a Party has not acceded to the specified text of any such Conventions on or before the date of
entry into force of this Agreement, it shall promptly make every effort to accede without delay.

3. A Party may implement in its domestic law more extensive protection and enforcement
of intellectual property rights than is required under this Agreement, provided that such
protection and enforcement is not inconsistent with this Agreement. | Z

ager

ARTICLE 14

National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to nationals of the other Party treatment no less favourable than
it accords to its own nationals with regard to the acquisition, protection, enjoyment and
enforcement of all intellectual property rights and any benefits derived therefrom.

2. A Party, shall not, as a condition of according national treatment under this Article,
require right holders to. comply with any formalities or conditions (including fixation,
publication or exploitation in the territory of a Party) in order to acquire, enjoy, enforce and
exercise rights or benefits in respect of copyright and related rights. .

3. A Party may derogate from paragraph 1 in relation to its judicial and administrative
procedures for the protection or enforcement of intellectual property rights, including any
procedure requiring a national of the other Party to designate for service of process an address
in the Party's territory or to appoint an agent in the Party's territory, if the derogation is
consistent with the relevant Convention listed in Article 13(2) of this Agreement, provided that
such derogation: |

(a) is necessary to secure compliance with measures that are not inconsistent with
this Agreement; and

(b)

is not applied in a manner that would constitute a restriction on trade.

4. No Party shall have any obligation under this Article with respect to procedures
provided in multilateral agreements concluded under the auspices of the World Intellectual
Property Organisation relating to the acquisition or maintenance of intellectual property rights.

ARTICLE 15

Copyright

1. Each Party shall protect all works that embody original expression within the meaning
of the Berne Convention. In particular:

(a)

all types of computer programs are literary works within the meaning of the
Berne Convention and each Party shall protect them as such; and

(b) - compilations of data or other material, whether in machine readable or other
form, which by reason of the selection or arrangement of their contents
constitute intellectual creations, shall be protected as works.

The protection a Party provides under subparagraph (b) shall not extend to the data or material
itself, or prejudice any copyright subsisting in that data or material.

2. Each Party shall provide to authors and their successors in interest those rights
"enumerated in the Berne Convention in respect of works covered by paragraph 1, and shall
provide the right to authorise or prohibit:

(a) the importation into the Party's territory of copies of the work, regardless of
whether such copies have been placed on the market by the relevant right
holder;

the first public distribution of the original and each copy of the work by sale,
rental or otherwise;

the communication of a work to the public; and

the rental of the original or a copy of a computer program for direct or indirect
commercial advantage.

Subparagraph (d) shall not apply where the copy of a computer program is not itself an
essential object of the rental. Each Party shall provide that putting the original or a copy of a
computer program on the market with the right holder's consent shall not exhaust the rental

right.
3. Each Party shall provide that for copyright and related rights:

(a) any person acquiring or holding any economic rights may freely and separately
transfer such rights by contract; and

any person acquiring or holding any such economic rights by virtue of a
contract, including contracts of employment underlying the creation of works
and sound recordings, shall be able to exercise those rights in its own name and
enjoy fully the benefits derived from those rights.

4. Each Party shall provide that, where the term of protection of a work is to be calculated
on a basis other than the life of a natural person, the term shall be not less than 75 years from
‘the end of the calendar year of the first authorised publication of the work or, failing such

authorised publication within 25 years from the creation of the work, not less than 100 years
from the end of the calendar year of the creation of the work. 

5. Neither Party may grant translation or reproduction licenses permitted under the
Appendix to the Berne Convention where legitimate needs in that Party's territory for copies or
translations of the work could be met by the right holder's voluntary actions but for obstacles
created by the Party's measures.

6. Each Party shall provide to the right holder in a sound recording the right to authorise .
or prohibit:

the direct or indirect reproduction, in whole or in part, of the sound recording;

the importation into the Party's territory of copies of the sound recording,
regardless of whether such copies have been placed on the market by the
relevant right holder;

the first public distribution of the original and each copy of the sound recording
by sale, rental or otherwise; and

(d) the rental, lease or lending of the original or a copy of the sound recording for
the purposes of direct or indirect commercial advantage.

Each Party shall provide that putting the original or a copy of a sound recording on the market
with the night holder's consent shall not exhaust the rental right.

7. Each Party shall provide to performers the right to authorise or prohibit:

(a) the fixation of their live musical performances in a sound recording;
(b) the reproduction of unauthorised fixations of their live musical performances in
a sound recording;

(c) the transmission or other communication to the public of sounds in a live |
_ musical performance; and

(d) _ the distribution, sale, rental, disposal or transfer of the unauthorised fixations of
their live performances in a sound recording, regardless of where the fixations
were made.

8. Each Party shall, through operation of this Agreement, apply the provisions of Article
18 of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works to existing sound
recordings.

9. Each Party shall confine limitations or exceptions to the rights provided for in this
Article to certain special cases that do not conflict with a normal exploitation of the work, and
do not unreasonable prejudice the legitimate interests of the right holder. 

ARTICLE 16
Protection of Encrypted Program-Carrying Satellite Signals

Within one year from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall
make it:

(a) a criminal offence to manufacture, assemble, modify, import, export, sell, lease
or otherwise. distribute a tangible or intangible device or system, knowing or having
reason to know that the device or system is primarily of assistance in decoding an
encrypted program-carrying satellite signal without the authorisation of the lawful
distributor of such signal;

(b) a criminal offence wilfully to receive or further distribute an encrypted
program-carrying satellite signal that has been decoded without the authorisation of the
lawful distributor of the signal; and

(c) a civil offence to engage in any activity prohibited under subparagraph (a) or (b)

Each Party shall provide that any civil offence established under subparagraph (c) shall be
_ actionable by any person that holds an interest in the encrypted programming signal or the
content thereof.

ARTICLE 17

Trademarks

1. For the purposes of this Agreement, a trademark consists of any sign, or any
combination of signs, capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one person from those
of another, including words, personal names, designs, letters, numerals, colours, figurative
elements, or the shape of goods or of their packaging. Trademarks shall include service marks,
collective marks, and certification marks.

2. Each Party shall provide to the owner of a registered trademark the right to prevent all
persons not having the owner's consent from using in commerce identical or similar signs for
goods or services that are identical, similar, or related to those goods or services in respect of
which the owner's trademark is registered, where such use would result in a likelihood of
confusion. In the case of the use of an identical sign for identical goods or services, a
likelihood of confusion shall be presumed. The rights described above shall not prejudice any
prior rights, nor shall they affect the possibility of making rights available in the basis of use.

3. A Party may make registrability depend on use. However, actual use of a trademark
shall not be a condition for filing an application for registration. Neither Party may refuse an application solely on the ground that intended use has not taken place before the expiry of a
period of three years from the date of application for registration.

4. Each Party shall provide a system for the registration of trademarks, which shall
include:

(a)

examination of applications;

(b) notice to be given to an applicant of the reasons for the refusal to register a
trademark, .

(c)

a-reasonable opportunity for the applicant to respond to the notice;

publication of each trademark either before or promptly after it is registered;
and

(e) a reasonable opportunity for interested persons to petition to oppose and cancel
the registration of a trademark.

SS: The nature of the goods or services to which a trademark is to be applied shall in no
case form an obstacle to the registration of a trademark.

6. Article 6°" of the Paris Convention shall apply, with such modifications as may be
necessary, to services. In determining whether a trademark is well-known, account shall be
taken of the knowledge of the trademark in the relevant sector of the public, including
knowledge in the Party's territory obtained as a result of the promotion of the trademark.
Neither Party may require that the reputation of the trademark extend beyond the sector of the
public that normally deals with the relevant goods or services or that the trademark be
registered.

7. Each Party shall use the International Classification of Goods and Services for
registration. Neither Party shall use such classification as the basis for determining the
likelihood of confusion.

. 8. Each Party shall provide that the initial registration of a trademark be for a term of at
least 10 years and the registration be indefinitely renewable for terms of not less than 10 years
when conditions for renewal have been met.

9. Each Party shall require the use of a trademark to maintain a registration. The
registration may be canceled for the reason of non-use only after an uninterrupted period of at
least three years of non-use, unless valid reasons based on the existence of obstacles to such
use are shown by the trademark owner. The law shall recognise, as valid reasons for non-use,
circumstances arising independently of the will of the trademark owner that constitute an
obstacle to the use of the trademark, such as import restrictions on, or other government

requirements for, goods or services identified by the trademark.

10. Each party shall recognise the use of a trademark by a person other than the trademark
owner, where such use is subject to the owner's control, as use of the trademark for purposes of
maintaining the registration.

11. Neither Party may encumber the use of a trademark in commerce by special
requirements, such as a use that reduces the trademark's function as an indication of source or a
use with another trademark. —

12. A Party. may determine conditions on the licensing and assignment of trademarks, it
being understood that the compulsory licensing of trademarks shall not be permitted. The
owner of a registered trademark shall have the right to assign its trademark with or without the
transfer of the ‘business to which the trademark belongs. However, a Party may require a
transfer of goodwill in a mark as part of a valid transfer of the mark.

13. A Party may provide limited. exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark, such as
fair use of descriptive terms, provided that such exceptions take into account the legitimate
interests of the trademark owner and of other persons.

14. Each Party shall refuse to register trademarks that consist of or comprise immoral,
deceptive or scandalous matter, or matter that may disparage or falsely suggest a connection
with persons, living or dead, institutions, beliefs or a Party's national symbols, or bring them
into contempt or disrepute. Each Party shall prohibit the registration as a trademark of words
that generically designate goods or services or types of goods or services to which the
trademark applies.

ARTICLE 18
Patents

1, Each Party shall make patents available for any invention, whether a product or a
process, in all fields of technology, provided that such invention is new, resulted from an
inventive step and is capable of industrial application. For purposes of this Article, a Party may
deem the terms " inventive step " and " capable of industrial application " to be synonymous
with the terms " non-obvious " and " useful", respectively.

2. If a Party has not made available patent protection for a product subject to a regulatory
review period prior to its commercial marketing or use commensurate with paragraph 1 as of
seventeen years prior to the date of this Agreement, that Party shall provide to the inventor of
any such product or its assignee the means to obtain product patent protection or equivalent
protection for such product for the unexpired term of the patent for such product granted in the
other Party, as long as the product has not been marketed at the time of this Agreement in the
Party providing protection under this paragraph and the person seeking such protection makes

TA

a timely request. The transitional protection must, at least, give the patent owner or his
assignee the right to exclude others from making, using or selling the invention during the
remaining term of the patent granted by the other Party.

3. Each Party shall provide that:

(a) where the subject matter of a patent is a product, the patent shall confer on the
patent owner the right to prevent other persons from making, using, selling,
offering for sale or importing the subject matter of the patent, without the
‘patent owner's consent; and .

where the subject matter of a patent is a process, the patent shall confer on the
patent owner the right to prevent other persons from using that process and
from using, selling, offering for sale or importing at least the product obtained
directly by that process, without the patent owner's consent.

4. A Party may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent,
provided that such exceptions do not conflict with a normal exploitation of the patent and do
not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner.

5. Patents shall be available and patent rights enjoyable without discrimination as to the
field of technology or whether products are imported or locally produced. -

6. A Party may revoke a patent only when grounds exist that would have justified a
refusal to grant the patent.

7. Each Party shall permit patent owners to assign and transfer by succession their patents,
and to conclude licensing contracts.

8. A Party may decline to allow use without the authorisation of the right holder of a
patent. However, where the law of a Party allows for use of the subject matter of a patent, other
than use allowed under paragraph 4, without the authorisation of the right holder, including use
by the government or other persons authorised by the government, the Party shall respect the
following provisions:

(a) authorisation of such use shall be considered on its individual merits;

(b) such use may be permitted only if; prior to such use, the proposed user has
made efforts to obtain authorisation from the right holder on reasonable
commercial terms and conditions and such efforts have not been successful
within a reasonable period of time. The requirement to make such efforts may
be waived by a Party in the case of a national emergency or other circumstances
of extreme urgency or in cases of public non-commercial use. In situations of
national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency, the right holder
shall, nevertheless, be notified as soon as reasonably practicable. In the case of
public non-commercial use, where the government or contractor, without making a patent search, knows or has demonstrable grounds to know that a

valid patent is or will be used by or for the government, the right holder shall be
informed promptly;

the scope and duration of such use shall be limited to the purpose for which it
was authorised, and in the case of semiconductor technology shall only be for
public noncommercial use or to remedy a practice determined after judicial or
administrative process to be anti-competitive.

such use shall be non-exclusive;

such use shall be non-assignable, except with that part of the enterprise or
goodwill that enjoys such use;

any such use shall be authorised predominantly for the supply of the Party's
domestic market;

authorisation for such use shall be liable, subject to adequate protection of the
legitimate interests of the persons so authorised, to be terminated if and when
the circumstances that led to it cease to exist and are unlikely to recur. The
competent authority shall have the authority to review, on petition of .an
interested party, the continued existence of these circumstances;

the right holder shall be paid adequate remuneration in the circumstances of
each case, taking into account the economic value of the authorisation;

the legal validity of any decision relating to the authorisation shall be subject to
judicial or other independent review by a distinct higher authority,

any decision relating to the remuneration provided in respect of such use shall
be subject judicial or other independent review by a distinct higher authority;

the Party shall not be obliged to apply the conditions set out in subparagraphs
(b) and (f) where such use is permitted to remedy a practice determined after
judicial or administrative process to be anticompetitive. The need to correct
anticompetitive practices may be taken into account in determining the amount
of remuneration in such cases. Competent authorities shall have the authority to
refuse termination of authorisation if and when the conditions that led to such
authorisation ate likely to recur; and

(1) the Party shall not authorise the use of the subject matter of a patent to permit
the exploitation of another patent except as a remedy for an adjudicated
violation of domestic laws regarding anticompetitive practices.

9. Where the subject matter of a patent is a process for obtaining a product, each Party
shall, in any infringement proceeding, place on the defendant the burden of establishing that
the allegedly infringing product was made by a process other than the patented process in one
or more of the following situations:

(a) the product obtained by the patented process is new; or

_(b) — a-substantial likelihood exists that the allegedly infringing product was made by
the process and the patent owner has been unable through reasonable efforts to
determine the process actually used.

In the gathering and evaluation of evidence, the legitimate interests of the defendant in
protecting its trade secrets shall be taken into account.

10. Each Party shall provide a term of protection for patents that shall not end before the
- expiration of a period of twenty years counted from the date of filing. A Party may extent the
term of patent protection, in appropriate cases, to compensate for delays caused by regulatory
approval processes.

ARTICLE 19
Semiconductor Layout Designs

1. Each Party shall protect layout designs (topographies) of integrated circuits ("layout
designs") in accordance with Articles 2 through 7, 12 and 16(3), other than Article 6(3), of the
Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits as opened for signature on
May 26, 1989, and, in addition, shall comply with paragraphs 2-8 of this Article.

2. Subject to paragraph 3, each Party shall make it unlawful for any person without the
right holder's authorisation to reproduce, import or distribute a protected layout design, an
integrated circuit in which a protected layout design is incorporated, or an article incorporating
such an integrated circuit only insofar as it continues to contain an unlawfully reproduced
layout design. ,

3. Neither Party may make unlawful any of the acts referred to in paragraph 2 performed
in respect of an integrated circuit that incorporates an unlawfully reproduced layout design, or
any article that incorporates such an integrated circuit, where the person performing those acts
or ordering those acts to be done did not know and had no reasonable ground to know, when it
acquired the integrated circuit or article incorporating such an integrated circuit, that it
incorporated an unlawfully reproduced layout design.

4. Each Party shall provide that, after the person referred to in paragraph 3 has received
sufficient notice that the layout design was unlawfully reproduced, such person may perform
any of the acts with respect to the stock on hand or ordered before such notice, but shall be
liable to pay the right holder for doing so an amount equivalent to a reasonable royalty such.as
would be payable under a freely negotiated license in respect of such a layout design.

5. Neither Party may permit the compulsory licensing of layout designs of integrated
circuits.

6. Any Party that requires registration as a condition for protection of a layout design shall
provide that the term of protection shall not end before the expiration of a period of 10 years
counted from the date of filing an application for registration or from the date on which the
mask work is first commercially exploited in the world, whichever occurs first.

7. Where a Party does not require registration as a condition for protection of a layout
design, the Party shall provide a term of protection of not less than 10 years from the date of
the first commercial exploitation of the layout design, wherever in the world it occurs.

8. Notwithstanding paragraphs 6 and 7, a Party may provide that the protection shall lapse
15 years after the creation of the layout design.

- ARTICLE 20

Protection of Confidential Information (Trade Secrets)

1. In the course of ensuring effective protection against unfair competition as provided in
Article 10bis of the Paris Convention (1967), each Party shall protect confidential information
in accordance with paragraph 2 below and data submitted to government or governmental
agencies in accordance with paragraphs 5 and 6 below.

2. Each Party shall provide the legal means for any person to prevent confidential
information from being disclosed to, acquired by, or used by others without the consent of the
person lawfully in control of the information in a manner contrary to honest commercial
practices, in so far as, and for so long as:

(a) the information is not generally known or readily ascertainable;

(b) the information has actual or potential commercial value because it is secret;
and

(c) the person lawfully in control of the information has taken reasonable steps under the circumstances to keep it secret.

3. Neither Party may limit the duration of protection for confidential information, so long
as the conditions in paragraph 2 exist.

4. Neither Party may discourage or impede the voluntary licensing of confidential
information by imposing excessive or discriminatory conditions on such licenses or conditions
that dilute the value of the confidential information.

5. If a Party requires, as a condition for approving the marketing of pharmaceutical or
agrichemical products, the submission of undisclosed test or other data, the origination of
which involves a considerable effort, the Party shall protect such data against unfair
commercial use. In addition, each Party shall protect such data against disclosure, except where
necessary to protect the public.

6. Each Party shall provide that for data of a type referenced in paragraph 5 that are
submitted to the Party after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, no person other than
the person that submitted them may, without the latter's permission, rely on such data in
support of an application for product approval during a reasonable period of time after their
submission. For this purpose, a reasonable period shall normally mean not less than five years
from the date on which the Party granted approval to the person that produced the data for
approval to market its product, taking account of the nature of the data and the person's efforts
and expenditures in producing them.

ARTICLE 21

Industrial Designs

1. Each Party shall provide for the protection of independently created industrial designs
that are new or original. A Party may provide that:

(a) designs are not new or original if they do not significantly differ from known
designs or combinations of known design features; and

(b) such protection shall not extend to designs dictated essentially by technical or
functional considerations.

2. Each Party shall ensure that the requirements for securing protection for textile designs,
in particular in regard to any cost, examination or publication, do not unreasonably impair a
person's opportunity to seek and obtain such protection. A Party may comply with this
obligation through industrial design law or copyright law.

3. Each Party shall provide the owner of a protected industrial design the right to prevent
other persons not having the owner's consent from making, selling, or otherwise distributing
articles bearing or embodying a design that is a copy, or substantially a copy, of the protected
design, when such acts are undertaken for commercial purposes.

4. A Party may provide limited exceptions to the protection of industrial designs, provided
that such exceptions do not conflict with the normal exploitation of protected industrial designs
and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the owner of the protected design.

5. Each Party shall provide a term of protection for industrial designs of at least 10 years.

ARTICLE 22
Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights

1. As specified in this Article and Articles 23 through 26, each Party shall provide
procedures in its domestic law that permit effective action against infringement of the
intellectual property rights covered by this Agreement. These procedures shall include
expeditious remedies to prevent infringement and remedies substantial enough to deter future
infringement. Each Party shall apply enforcement procedures in a manner that does not create
barriers to legitimate trade and contains effective safeguards against abuse.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its enforcement procedures are fair and equitable, are not
unnecessarily complicated or costly, and do not entail unreasonable time limits or unwarranted
delays.

3. Each Party shall ensure that decisions on the merits of a case in judicial and
administrative enforcement proceedings are:

(a) in writing and state the reasons on which the decisions are based;
(b) = made available without undue delay at least to the parties in a proceeding; and

(c) based only on evidence in respect of which such parties were offered the
opportunity to be heard.

4. Each Party shall ensure that parties in a proceeding have an opportunity to have final
administrative decisions reviewed by a judicial authority of that Party and, subject to
jurisdictional provisions in its domestic laws concerning the importance of a case, to have
reviewed at least the legal aspects of initial judicial decisions on the merits of a case.
Notwithstanding the above, neither Party shall be required to provide for judicial review of
acquittals in criminal cases.

Tr

5. Nothing in this Article or Articles 23 through 26 shall be construed to require either
Party to establish a judicial system for the enforcement of intellectual property rights distinct
from that Party's system for the enforcement of laws in general.

ARTICLE 23

Specific Procedural and Remedial
Aspects of Civil and Administrative Procedures

l. Each Party shall make available to right holders civil judicial procedures for the
enforcement of any intellectual property right covered by this Agreement. Each Party shall
provide that:

defendants have the right to written notice that is timely and contains sufficient
detail, including the basis of the claims;

parties in a proceeding are allowed to be represented by independent legal
counsel;

enforcement procedures do not include imposition of overly burdensome
requirements concerning mandatory personal appearances;

all parties in a proceeding are duly entitled to substantiate their claims and to
present relevant evidence, and

the procedures include a means to identify and protect confidential information.

Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities:

(a) where a party in a proceeding has presented reasonably available evidence
sufficient to support its claims and has specified evidence relevant to the
substantiation of its claims that is within the control of the opposing party , to
order the opposing party to produce such evidence, subject in appropriate cases
to conditions that ensure the protection of confidential information;

where a party in a proceeding voluntarily and without good reason refuses
access to, or otherwise does not provide relevant evidence under that party's
control within a reasonable period, or significantly impedes a proceeding
relating to an enforcement action, to make preliminary and final determinations,
affirmative or negative, on the basis of the evidence presented, including the
complaint or the allegation presented by the party adversely affected by the
denial of access to evidence, subject to providing the parties an opportunity to
be heard on the allegations or evidence; ‘boot

Th

to order a party in a proceeding to desist from an infringement, including
measures to prevent the entry of imported goods at the border;

to order the infringer of an intellectual property right to pay the right holder
damages adequate to compensate for the injury the right holder has suffered
because of the infringement and the profits of the infringer that are attributable
to the infringement and are not taken into account in computing the actual
damages;

to order an infringer of an intellectual property right to pay the right holder's
expenses, which may include appropriate attorney's fees; and

to order a party in a proceeding at whose request measures were taken and who
has abused enforcement procedures to provide adequate compensation to any
party wrongfully enjoined or restrained in the proceeding for the injury suffered
because of such abuse and to pay that party's expenses, which may include
appropriate attorney's fees:

3. With respect to the authority referred to in subparagraph 2(d), a Party shall, at least
with respect to works protected by copyright or neighbouring rights, authorise the judicial
authorities, at their discretion, to order the payment of pre-established damages.

4. Each Party shall, in order to create an effective deterrent to infringement and
counterfeiting, authorise its judicial authorities to order that:

(a) goods that they have found to be infringing be, without compensation of any
sort, disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to avoid
any injury caused to the right holder or, unless this would be contrary to
existing constitutional requirements, destroyed; and

materials and implements the predominant use of which has been in the creation
of the infringing goods be, without compensation of any sort, disposed of
outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to minimise the risks of
further infringements.

In considering whether to issue such an order, judicial authorities shall take in to account the
need for proportionality between the seriousness of the infringement and the remedies ordered,
as well as the interests of other persons. In regard to counterfeit goods, the simple removal of
the trademark unlawfully affixed shall not be sufficient, other than in exceptional cases, to
permit release of the goods into the channels of commerce.

5. In respect of the administration of any law pertaining to the protection or enforcement
of intellectual property rights, each Party may exempt public authorities and officials from
liability for their infringement of the rights governed by this Agreement, unless their actions
were not taken or intended in good faith in the course of the administration of such laws.

6. Notwithstanding the other provisions of Articles 21 through 25, where a Party is sued
with respect to an infringement or counterfeiting of an intellectual property right as a result of
its unauthorised exercise of that right or the unauthorised exercise of that right on its behalf,
that Party may limit the remedies available against it to the payment to the right holder of
adequate remuneration in the circumstances of each case, taking into account the economic
value of the use.

7. Each Party shall provide that, where a civil remedy can be ordered as a result of

administrative procedures on the merits of a case, such procedures shall conform to principles
equivalent in substance to those set out in this Article.

ARTICLE 24
Provisional Measures

1. Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities to order prompt and effective
provisional measures:

(a) to prevent an infringement of any intellectual property right or the

counterfeiting of any product that is the subject of intellectual property rights,
and in particular to prevent the entry into the channels of commerce in their
jurisdiction of allegedly infringing goods, including measures to prevent the
entry of imported goods at the border; and

(b) to preserve relevant evidence in regard to the alleged infringement or
counterfeiting.

2. Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities to require any applicant for
provisional measures to provide to the judicial authorities any evidence reasonably available to
that applicant that the judicial authorities consider necessary to enable them to determine with
a sufficient degree of certainty whether:

(a) the applicant is the right holder;

(b) the applicant's right is being infringed or such infringement is imminent; and

(c) any delay in the issuance of such measures is likely to cause irreparable harm to
the right holder, or there is a demonstrable risk of evidence being destroyed.

Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities to require the applicant to provide a security or equivalent assurance sufficient to protect the interests of the defendant and to prevent abuse.

3. Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities to require an applicant for provisional
measures to provide other information necessary for the identification of the relevant goods by
the authority that will execute the provisional measures.

4. Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities to order provisional measures on an ex
parte basis, in particular where any delay is likely to cause irreparable harm to the right holder,
or where there is a demonstrable risk of evidence being destroyed.

5. Each Party shall authorise that where provisional measures are adopted by that Party's
judicial authorities on an ex parte basis:

(a) a person affected shall be given notice of those measures without delay but in
any event no later than immediately after the execution of the measures;

a defendant shall, on request, have those measures reviewed by that Party’s
judicial authorities for the purpose of deciding, within a reasonable period after
notice of those measures is given, whether the measures shall be modified,
revoked or confirmed, and shall be given an opportunity to be heard in the
review proceedings.

6. Without prejudice to paragraph 5, each Party shall provide that, on the request of the
defendant, the Party's judicial authorities shall revoke or otherwise cease to apply the
provisional measures taken on the basis of paragraphs 1 and 4 if proceedings leading to a
decision on the merits are not initiated:

(a) within a reasonable period as determined by the judicial authority ordering the
measures where the Party's domestic law so permits; or

(b) in the absence of such a determination, within a period of no more than 20
working days or 31 calendar days, whichever is longer.

7. Each Party shall authorise its judicial authorities to order, on request of the defendant,
that the applicant provide compensation for injury caused by provisional measures:

(a) if the provisional measures are revoked or lapse because of any act or omission
of the applicant, or

(b) if the judicial authorities subsequently find there has been no infringement or threat of infringement of any intellectual property right.

8. Each Party shall provide that, where a provisional measure can be ordered as a result of
administrative procedures, such procedures shall conform to principles equivalent in substance
to those set out in this Article.

ARTICLE 25

Criminal Procedures and Penalties

1. Each Party shall provide criminal procedures and penalties to be applied at least in
cases of wilful trademark counterfeiting or infringement of copyrights or neighbouring rights
on a commercial scale. Each Party shall provide that penalties available include imprisonment
or monetary fines, or both, sufficient to provide a deterrent, consistent with the level of
penalties applied for crimes of a corresponding gravity.

2. Each Party shall provide that, in appropriate cases, its judicial authorities may order the
seizure, forfeiture and destruction of infringing goods and of any materials and implements the
predominant use of which has been in the commission of the offence.

3. Each Party may provide that, in appropriate cases, its judicial authorities may impose
criminal penalties for the infringement of intellectual property rights other than those in
paragraph 1, where they are committed wilfully and on a commercial scale.

ARTICLE 26

Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights at the Border

1. Each Party shall adopt procedures to enable a right holder, who has valid grounds for
suspecting that the importation of counterfeit trademark goods or unauthorised copies of works
protected by copyrights or neighbouring rights may take place, to lodge an application in writing
with its competent authorities, whether administrative or judicial, for the suspension by the
customs administration of the release of such goods into free circulation. No Party shall be
obligated to apply such procedures to goods in transit. A Party may permit such an application
to be made in respect of goods that involve other infringements of intellectual property rights,
provided that the requirements of this Article are met. A Party may also provide for
corresponding procedures concerning the suspension by the customs administration of the
release of infringing goods destined for exportation from its territory.

2. Each Party shall require any applicant who initiates procedures under paragraph 1 to
provide adequate evidence:

to satisfy that Party's competent authorities that, under its domestic laws, there
is prima facie an infringement of its intellectual property right; and

(b) to supply a sufficiently detailed description of the goods to make them readily
recognisable by the customs administration.

The competent authorities shall inform the applicant within a reasonable period whether they
have accepted the application and, if so, the period for which the customs administration will
take action.

3. Each Party shall authorise its competent authorities to require an applicant under
paragraph 1 to provide a security or equivalent assurance sufficient to protect the defendant
and the competent authorities and to prevent abuse. Such security or equivalent assurance shall
not unreasonably deter recourse to these procedures.

4. A Party's customs administration, upon receiving an application pursuant to procedures
adopted in accordance with this Article, may suspend the release of goods involving industrial
designs, patents, integrated circuits or trade secrets into free circulation on the basis of a
decision other than by a judicial or other independent authority; provided, however, if the
period set forth in paragraphs 6 through 8 has expired without the granting of provisional relief
by the duly empowered authority , and provided that all other conditions for importation have
been complied with, such Party shall permit the owner, importer or consignee of such goods to
receive such goods for entry into commerce on the posting of a security in an amount sufficient
to protect the right holder against any infringement. Payment of such security shall not
prejudice any other remedy available to the right holder, it being understood that the security
shall be released if the right holder fails to pursue its right of action within a reasonable period
of time.

5. Each Party shall ensure that its customs administration will promptly notify the
importer and the applicant when the customs administration suspends the release of goods
pursuant to paragraph 1.

6. Each Party shall ensure that its customs administration will release goods from
suspension if within a period not exceeding 10 working days after the applicant under
paragraph 1 has been served notice of the suspension the customs administration has not been
informed that:

(a) a party other than the defendant has initiated proceedings leading to a decision
on the merits of the case, or

a competent authority has taken provisional measures prolonging the
suspension, provided that all other conditions for importation ‘or exportation
have been met. Each Party shall provide that, in appropriate cases, the customs
administration may extend the suspension by another 10 working days. 

7. Each Party shall ensure that if proceedings leading to a decision on the merits of the
case have been initiated, a review, including a right to be heard, shall take place on request of
the defendant with a view to deciding, within a reasonable period, whether the measures shall
be modified, revoked or confirmed.

8. Notwithstanding paragraphs 6 and 7, where the suspension of the release of goods is
carried out or continued in accordance with a provisional judicial measure, Article 24(6) shall

apply.

9. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities have the authority to order the
applicant under paragraph 1 to pay the importer, the consignee and the owner of the goods
appropriate compensation for any injury caused to them through the wrongful detention of
goods or through the detention of goods released pursuant to paragraph 6.

10. Without prejudice to the protection of confidential information, each Party shall ensure
that its competent authorities have the authority to give the right holder sufficient opportunity
to have any goods detained by the customs administration inspected in order to substantiate its
claims. Each Party shall also ensure that its competent authorities have the authority to give the
importer an equivalent opportunity to have any such goods inspected. Where the competent
authorities have made a positive determination on the merits of a case, a Party may provide the
competent authorities the authority to inform the right holder of the names and addresses of the
consignor, the importer and the consignee, and of the quantity of the goods in question.

11. | Where a Party requires its competent authorities to act on their own initiative and to
suspend the release of goods in respect of which they have acquired prima facie evidence that
an intellectual property rights is being infringed:

the competent authorities may at any time seek from the right holder any
information that might assist them to exercise these powers;

the importer and the right holder shall be promptly notified of the suspension by
the Party's competent authorities, and where the importer lodges an appeal
against the suspension with competent authorities, the suspension shall be
subject to the conditions, with such modifications as may be necessary, set out
in paragraphs 6 through 8; and

(c) the Party may exempt public authorities and officials from liability, except
when the offending actions were not taken or intended in good faith.

12. Without prejudice to other rights of action open to the right holder and subject to the
defendant's right to seek judicial review, each Party shall provide that its competent authorities
shall have the authority to order the destruction or disposal of infringing goods in accordance
with the principles set out in Article 23(4). In regard to counterfeit goods, the authorities shall not allow the re-exportation of the infringing goods in an unaltered state or subject them to a different customs procedure, other than in exceptional circumstances.

13. A Party may exclude from the application of paragraphs 1 through 12 small quantities
of goods of a non-commercial nature contained in travellers’ personal luggage or sent in small
consignments that are not repetitive.

ARTICLE 27

Existing Subject Matter

To the extent this Agreement requires a Party to increase its level of protection and
enforcement of intellectual property rights, it gives rise to obligations in respect of all subject
matter existing at the date of application of this Agreement for the Party in question, and which
is protected in the Party on the date the Agreement enters into force, or which meets or comes
subsequently to meet the criteria for protection under the terms of this Agreement. This
obligation is in addition to the obligation to implement fully the obligations of Article 18 of the
Berne Convention (Paris text) with respect to all works, including sound recordings.

ARTICLE 28

Definitions for Chapter IT

For purposes of this Chapter:

(a) “confidential information” includes trade secrets, privileged information, and
other undisclosed information that has not become subject to an unrestricted
public disclosure under the Party’s domestic law. ,

“encrypted program-carrying satellite signal’ means a program-carrying
satellite signal that is transmitted in a form whereby the aural or visual
characteristics, or both, are modified or altered for the purpose of preventing the
unauthorised reception of a program carried in that signal by persons without
the authorised equipment that is designed to eliminate the effects of such
modification or alteration;

“in a manner contrary to honest commercial practices” means at least practices
such as knowing breach or inducement to breach of contract, of confidence, or
of an intellectual property right, and includes the acquisition, disclosure, or use
of confidential information by third persons who knew, or were negligent in
failing to know, that such practices were involved in the acquisition;

THR

o~/

“intellectual property rights” refers to copyrights and related rights, trademarks,
patents, protection of integrated circuit layout designs and encrypted satellite
signals, trade secrets, and protection of plant breeders rights;

“lawful distributor of an encrypted satellite signal” in a Party means the person
who originally transmitted the signal, regardless of the location of such person,
and any other person or persons designated by the original transmitter as lawful
distributors of such signal in such Party.

“national” of a Party shall, in respect of the relevant intellectual property rights,
be understood as those natural or legal persons that would meet the criteria for
eligibility for protection provided for in the Paris Convention, the Berne
Convention, the Geneva Convention, the International Convention for the
Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting
Organisations (1961), the UPOV Convention (1978), the UPOV Convention
(1991) or the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits,
as if each Party were a party to those Conventions, and with respect to
intellectual property rights that are not the subject of these Conventions,
“national of a Party” shall be understood at least to include any person that is a
citizen or permanent resident of that Party.

“public” includes, with respect to rights of communication and performance of
works provided for under Articles 11, 11°%(1) and 14(1)(i) of the Berne
Convention, with respect to dramatic, dramatic-musical, musical and
cinematographic works, at least, any aggregation of individuals intended to be
the object of, and capable of perceiving, communications or performances of
works, regardless of whether they can do so at the same or different times or in
the same or different places, provided that such an aggregation is larger than a
family and its immediate circle of acquaintances or is not a group comprising a
limited number of individuals having similarly close ties that has not been
formed for the principal purpose of receiving such performances and
communications of works; and

“right holder’ includes the right holder personally, any other natural or legal
person authorised by the right holder who is an exclusive license of the right, or
other authorised persons, including federations and associations, having legal
standing under domestic law to assert such rights.

THT

ARTICLE 29

Consultations

Both Parties agree, at the request of either Party, to consult promptly on matters relating
to the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights, in particular with respect to
implementation of the obligations of this Chapter.

ARTICLE 30
Timing of Specific Intellectual Property Obligations

1. Each Party shall submit any legislation and issue any regulations necessary to carry out
fully its obligations under Articles 15, 17,18,19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26 no later than
twenty-one months following the entry into force of this Agreement, and exert its best efforts
to enact and implement such legislation and give effect to such regulations no later than
twenty-seven months following the entry into force of this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall submit any legislation and issue any regulations necessary to carry out
fully its obligations under Article 16 no later than twenty-seven months following the entry
into force of this Agreement, and exert its best efforts to enact and implement such legislation
and give effect to such regulations no later than thirty-six months following the entry into force
of this Agreement.

3. Notwithstanding the time frames for implementation of the obligations of Articles 15
through 26 set forth in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, each Party shall immediately comply to the
extent possible under its laws, regulations and practice with the obligations set forth in such
Articles and shall at no time lessen its level of compliance with such obligations.

4. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, neither Party shall be obligated
to comply with Article 14(1) unless and until such time as both Parties provide the level of
protection required under Articles 15 through 26 and have exchanged written communications
to that effect. The Parties may agree to be bound by their obligations under Article 14(1) on an
Article-by-Article basis (for Articles 15 through 26) as long as the communications referred to
in this section have been exchanged for such individual Articles.

'S. Articles 13 through 29 shall come into force upon the Parties’ exchange of notes
indicating that all the legislation and regulations necessary to give full effect to the obligations
undertaken herein have come into force.

THO

CHAPTER Il

TRADE IN SERVICES

ARTICLE 31
Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement, trade in services is defined as the supply of a

service:

(a) from the territory of one Party into the territory of the other Party;
in the territory of one Party to the service consumer of any other Party;

by a service supplier of one Party , through commercial presence in the territory
of the other Party;

by a service supplier of one Party, through presence of natural persons” of a
Party in the territory of other Party .

ARTICLE 32
Market Access
1. Each Party shall impose no restriction on the ability of the nationals and companies of
the other Party to engage in trade in services in the sectors listed in paragraphs 1 and 2 of
Article 34, and to this end shall not maintain or adopt either with respect to a regional
subdivision or with respect to its entire territory the following restrictions in those sectors:
(a) limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the form of numerical

quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirements of an
economic needs test;

(b) limitations on the total value service transactions or assets in the form of

* The obligations of this Chapter with respect to supply of a service through presence of natural persons shall
extend only to supply of a service through (1) services sales persons (persons not based in the Party, and receiving
no remuneration from a source located in that Party, who are engaged in activities related to representing a
services supplier for the purpose of negotiating for the sale of the services of that supplier); and (2) intra-corporate
transferees (managers, executives, and specialists, who are employees of firms that provide within the Party
through a branch, subsidiary, or affiliate established in the Party and who have been in the prior employ of their
firm outside the Party). bo

com

numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

limitations on the total number of service operations or the total quantity of
service output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of
quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test’;

limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a
particular service sector or that a service supplier may employ and who are
necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific service in the form
of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint venture
through which a service supplier may supply a service; and

limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or
aggregate foreign investment.

2. Obligations of the United States are subject to the terms, limitations and conditions for
market access set out in the United States schedule of specific commitments under the WTO
General Agreement on Trade in Services (“GATS”).

ARTICLE 33
National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the other party, in respect to
all measures affecting the supply of services, treatment no less favourable than it accords to its
own like service and service suppliers.

2. A Party may meet the requirements of paragraph 1 by according to services and service
suppliers of the other Party, either formally identical treatment or formally different treatment
to that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.

3 Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less
favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services or service suppliers
of the Party compared to like services or service suppliers of the other Party.

4. Obligations of the United States are subject to the conditions and qualifications on
national treatment set out in the United States schedule of specific commitments under the
GATS.

3 Subparagraph (c) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of services. 

37

ARTICLE 34

Covered Sectors

1. For the purpose of this Agreement only, and without prejudice to any future requests by
the United States in the Lao PDR's accession to the WTO Agreement, or any other bilateral,
regional, or multilateral trade negotiation, this Chapter shall apply to the following service

sectors:

(a)

(i)
G)

the following professional services: legal services, accounting, auditing and
bookkeeping services, taxation consulting services, architectural services,
engineering services, integrated engineering services;

computer and related services;

the following business services: advertising services, market research and
market polling services, management consulting services;

basic and value-added telecommunications services, as indicated in the list in
paragraph 2, including commitments to regulate basic telecommunications
providers fairly and to provide market access to and use of basic
telecommunications networks;

the following audiovisual services: motion picture and video tape production

and distribution services, motion picture projection services, sound recording;

construction and related engineering services;

the following distribution services: wholesale trade, retail trade, and
franchising;

insurance, banking, and other financial services, as indicated in the list in
paragraph 3;

health and medical care services;

educational services; and

tourism and travel related services. Ean

nee

2. Further to paragraph 1 above, this Chapter shall apply to the following basic and value-
added telecommunications services:

(a) Basic telecommunications services:*
(i). voice services;
(ii). | packet-switched data transmission services;

(iii)  circuit-switched data transmission services;

(iv) telex services;

(v) telegraph services; .

(vi) facsimile services;

(vii) private leased circuit services; Sand
(viii) other basic communications services.
Mobile services:

(i) analogue/Digital cellular services;

(ii) PCS (Personal Communications Services);
(iii) paging services;

(iv) mobile data services;

Value-added telecommunications services:

(i) electronic mail;

* Any service listed encompasses local, long distance and international services for public and non-public °
use, unless otherwise: noted in the sector column. Any service listed may be provided on a facilities-basis or by
resale, unless otherwise noted. Any service listed may be provided through any means of technology (e.g., fiber
optic cable, cable TV, wireless, satellites).

° Sub sector (vii), "private leased circuit transmission services" includes the sale or lease of any type of
network capacity for the supply of services listed in any other subsector, and shall include network capacity with
respect to submarine cables, satellite space segment, satellite earth or ground Stations and terrestrial wireless networks.

voice mail;

on-line information and data base retrieval;

electronic data interchange;

(v) .. enhanced/value-added facsimile services (including store and forward,
store and retrieve),

(vi) code and protocol conversion;

(vii) on-line information and/or data processing (including transaction
processing); and

(viii) other value-added telecommunications services.

3. Further to paragraph 1 above and subject to the provisions of Article 35, this Chapter
shall apply to the following financial services:

(a) Insurance and insurance-related services:
(ij) __ direct insurance (including co-insurance):

(A) _ life; and
(B) non-life.

(11) ‘reinsurance and retrocession;
(iii) | insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency; and

(iv) services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, actuarial, risk
assessment and claim settlement services. —

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance):
(i) acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public;

(ii) lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage credit,
factoring and financing of commercial transaction;

(iii) financing leasing; a i

enema RC SS 9 en

all payment and money transmission services, including credit, charge
and debit cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts;

guarantees and commitments;

trading for own account or for account of customers, whether on an
exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, the following:

(A) money market instruments (including cheques, bills, certificates of
deposits );

(B) foreign exchange;

derivative products including , but not limited to, futures and
options;

exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including products
such as swaps, forward rate agreements;

transferable securities;

(F) other negotiable instruments and financial assets, including
bullion;

participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting
and placement as agent (whether publicly or privately) and provision of
services related to such issues;

money broking;

asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all forms of
collective investment management, pension fund management,
custodial, depository and trust services;

settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities,
derivative products, and other negotiable instruments;

provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data
processing and related software by suppliers of other financial services;

advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary financial services with
respect to all the activities listed in subparagraphs (i) through (xi),
including credit reference and analysis, investment and portfolio
research and advice, advice on acquisitions and on corporate
restructuring and strategy.

ARTICLE 35
Financial Services

1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Agreement, a Party shall not be prevented
from taking measures for prudential reasons, including for protection of investors, depositors,
policy holders or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed by a financial service supplier, or
to ensure the integrity and stability of the financial system. Where such measures do not
conform with the provisions of this Agreement, they shall not be used as a means of avoiding
the Party’s commitments or obligations under this Agreement.

2. Not all of the services listed in paragraph 3 of Article 34 are provided in Laos as of the
date of signature of this Agreement. Where such services are not provided by the private sector
in the Lao PDR, access by financial service suppliers of the United States and the provision of
new financial services may be subject to measures adopted for prudential reasons, in
accordance with paragraph 1 above.

3. The obligations in Articles 32 and 33 shall not, with respect to the financial services
sector, apply to the United States. The United States will review the application of this
paragraph one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

TAN

CHAPTER IV

GENERAL ARTICLES
ARTICLE 36

General Definitions

For the purposes of Chapter I, Article 32 and Article 38, the terms set forth below shall

have the following meanings:

(a)

"Company" means any kind of:
(i) corporation,
(ii) company,
(iii) association,
(iv) partnership,
(v) — sole proprietorship,
(vi) joint venture, or

(vii) other organisation.

whether or not organised for pecuniary gain, or privately or governmentally
owned or controlled, and legally constituted under the laws and regulations of a
Party or a political subdivision thereof (i.e. all levels of government);

"national" means a natural person who is a national of a Party under its
applicable law.

ARTICLE 37

National Security

The provisions of this Agreement shall not limit the right of either Party to take any

action for the protection of its security interests. gen

ARTICLE 38
General Exceptions

1. Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where the
same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade, nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed to prohibit the adoption or enforcement by a Party of measures:

(a) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Agreement, including measures related to the protection of
intellectual property rights and the prevention of deceptive practices, or

(b) referred to in Article XX of the GATT 1994.

2. Each Party reserves the right to deny any company the advantages of this Agreement if
nationals of any third country control such a company and, in the case of a company of the
other Party, that company has no substantial business activities in the territory of the other
Party or is controlled by nationals of a third country with which the denying country does not
maintain normal economic relations.

3. Nothing in this Agreement limits the application of any existing or future agreements
between the Parties on trade in textiles and textile products.

4. Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude a Party from applying its laws relating to
entities substantially owned or effectively controlled by the government of the other Party.

ARTICLE 39
Consultations, Dispute Settlement, Compensation and Adjustment

The Parties agree to consult periodically to review the operation of this Agreement.

2. The Parties agree to consult promptly through appropriate channels at the request of
either Party to discuss any matter concerning the interpretation or implementation of this
Agreement and other relevant aspects of the relations between the Parties.

3. In the event either Party believes that the other Party has failed to implement one or
more obligations in this Agreement, or otherwise believes that any benefit accruing to it
directly or indirectly is being denied as a result of an action by the other Party, such ya

TART

request compensation from the other Party in an amount that is equivalent in value to the
damage to such Party’s interests.

4. If the Party from whom compensation is requested fails to provide such compensation
within a reasonable period of time, the Party requesting compensation may take action that
affects the goods or services of the other Party in an amount that is equivalent in value to the
damage to the interests of the Party requesting compensation.

ARTICLE 40
Final Provisions

1. The provisions of this Agreement shall apply to the respective customs territories of the
Parties.

2. This Agreement shall enter into force on the day on which the Parties have exchanged
notifications that each has completed the legal procedures necessary for this purpose, and shall
remain in force for three years.

3. This Agreement shall be extended for successive terms of three years if neither Party
notifies the other Party of its intent to terminate this Agreement at least 30 days before the end
of a term.

4. If either Party does not have domestic legal authority to carry out its obligations under
this Agreement, either Party may suspend application of this Agreement, or, with agreement of
the other Party, any part of this Agreement. In that event, the Parties will seek, to the fullest
extent practicable under domestic law, to minimise unfavourable effects on existing trade
relations between the Parties.