Inspired by their longstanding ties of friendship and cooperation in many sectors of
common concerns and interests, especially in economic areas based on mutual benefit
and confidence;

Recalling the Joint Ministerial Statement on the Negotiation of the Chile-Indonesia
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IC-CEPA) signed in Jakarta on 12
May 2017;

Desiring to bring the longstanding economic relations to a new chapter of economic
cooperation by reducing barriers and widening economic linkages between the Parties
through liberalising trade;

Confident that the strengthening of their economic partnership will provide a strong
platform for the expansion and deepening of economic ties and cooperation which will
bring economic and social benefits, create new opportunities for workers and
businesses, and improve the living standards of their people;

Convinced that IC-CEPA, covering trade in goods would serve as an important
framework to boost economic growth and equitable economic development;

Desiring to promote bilateral trade through the establishment of clear, transparent,
predictable and mutually advantageous trade rules and the avoidance or removal of
trade barriers;

Sharing the belief that a comprehensive economic partnership shall produce mutual
benefits to each Party and contribute to the expansion and development of world trade
under the multilateral trading system embodied in the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organisation (WTO Agreement);

Reaffirming the respective rights and obligations of the Parties under the World Trade
Organisation (WTO) and other existing international agreements and arrangements;

Conscious of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) goals and aware of the
growing importance of trade and investment for the economies of the Asia-Pacific

region; and

Determined to establish a legal framework for such comprehensive economic
partnership among the Parties.

Have agreed as follows:

CHAPTER 1

INITIAL PROVISIONS

Article 1.1: Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties, consistent with Article XXIV of GATT 1994, hereby establish a
free trade area in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.

Article 1.2: Relation to Other Agreements

1. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other
under the WTO Agreement and other agreements to which the Parties are party.

2. If a Party considers that a provision of this Agreement is inconsistent with a
provision of another agreement to which it and the other Party are party, the Parties
shall, on request, consult with each other with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory
solution. This paragraph is without prejudice to the rights and obligations of a Party
under Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement). !

! For the purposes of application of this Agreement, the Parties agree that the fact that an

agreement provides more favourable treatment of goods than that provided for under this Agreement does
not mean that there is an inconsistency within the meaning of paragraph 2.

1

CHAPTER 2

GENERAL DEFINITIONS

Article 2.1: Definitions of General Application
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:

Agreement means the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between Chile
and Indonesia (IC-CEPA);

Commission means the IC-CEPA Joint Commission established pursuant to Article
11.1 (C-CEPA Joint Commission);

Customs Authority means the authority that, according to the legislation of each Party,
is responsible for the administration and enforcement of its customs laws:

(a) for Chile, the National Customs Service, or its successor; and

(b) for Indonesia, the Directorate General of Customs and Excise, Ministry
of Finance, or its successor;

customs duty includes any import duty and a charge of any kind imposed in connection
with the importation of a good, but does not include any:

(a) charges equivalent to internal taxes, including excise duties, sales tax,
and goods and services taxes imposed in accordance with a Party’s
commitments under paragraph 2 of Article HI of GATT 1994;

(b) antidumping or countervailing duty or safeguards duty applied in
accordance with Chapter 8 (Trade Remedies); or

(c) fees or other charges that are limited in amount to the approximate cost
of services rendered, and do not represent a direct or indirect protection
for domestic goods or a taxation of imports for fiscal purposes;

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, contained in Annex 1A to the
WTO Agreement;

days mean calendar days, including weekends and public holidays;

existing means in effect on the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, contained in
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

Harmonised System (HS) means the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding
System governed by The International Convention on the Harmonised Commodity
Description and Coding System, including its General Rules of Interpretation, Section
Notes, and Chapter Notes, and their amendments, as adopted and implemented by the
Parties in their respective tariff laws;

heading means the first four digits in the tariff classification number under the
Harmonised System (HS);

measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,
procedure, decision, any administrative action or any other form;

originating good means a good that qualifies as an originating good in accordance with
the rules of origin set out in Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin);

person means a natural person or a juridical person;
person of a Party means a natural person or a juridical person of a Party;

preferential tariff treatment means the duty rate applicable under this Agreement to
an originating good;

Safeguards Agreement means the Agreement on Safeguards, contained in Annex 1A to
the WTO Agreement;

SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

subheading means the first six digits in the tariff classification number under the
Harmonised System (HS);

TBT Agreement means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, contained in
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

territory means:
(a) for Chile, the land, maritime, and air space under its sovereignty, and the
exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf within which it
exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction in accordance with

international law and its domestic law; and

(b) — for Indonesia, the land territories, internal waters, archipelagic waters,
territorial sea, including seabed and subsoil thereof, and airspace over

3

such territories and waters, as well as continental shelf and exclusive
economic zone, over which Indonesia has sovereignty, sovereign rights,
or jurisdiction as defined in its laws and in accordance with the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, done at Montego Bay,
December 10, 1982;

WTO means the World Trade Organisation; and

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organisation, done on April 15, 1994.

CHAPTER 3

TRADE IN GOODS

Article 3.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

agricultural goods mean those goods referred to in Article 2 of the Agreement on
Agriculture, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement (WTO Agreement on
Agriculture);

agricultural export subsidies shall have the meaning assigned to that term in Article 1
(e) of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture, including any amendment of that Article;

consular transactions mean requirements that goods of a Party intended for export to
the territory of the other Party must first be submitted to the supervision of the consul of
the importing Party in the territory of the exporting Party for the purpose of obtaining
consular invoices or consular visas for commercial invoices, certificates of origin,
manifests, shippers’ export declarations or any other customs documentation required
on or in connection with importation;

duty-free means free of customs duty;

Import Licensing Agreement means the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures,
contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement; and

import licensing means administrative procedures requiring the submission of an
application or other documentation (other than that generally required for customs
clearance purposes) to the relevant administrative body as a prior condition for
importation into the territory of the importing Party.

Article 3.2: Scope and Coverage

This Chapter applies to trade in all goods between the Parties.

Article 3.3: National Treatment

Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in
accordance with Article HI of GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. To this
end, Article III of GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 3.4: Reduction and/or Elimination of Customs Duties

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall progressively
reduce and/or eliminate customs duties on originating goods of the other Party in
accordance with its Schedule of Tariff Commitments in Annex 3-A.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, a Party shall not increase any
existing customs duty or introduce a new customs duty on an originating good covered
by this Agreement.

3. If the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) rate of customs duties applied by a Party on
a particular good is lower than the rate of customs duty provided for in its schedule of
tariff commitments set out in Annex 3-A, that Party shall apply the lower rate to the
originating good of the other Party.

4. On request of either Party, the Parties shall consult to consider improving tariff
commitments set out in their Schedules set out in Annex 3-A. An agreement between
the Parties to improve tariff commitments under this Agreement shall be considered and
adopted in accordance with Article 11.1.4(c) (C-CEPA Joint Commission).

5. A Party may at any time accelerate unilaterally the reduction and/or elimination
of customs duties on originating goods of the other Party set out in its Schedule in
Annex 3-A. A Party considering doing so shall inform the other Party as early as
practicable.

Article 3.5: Administrative Fees and Formalities

1. Each Party shall ensure that fees, charges, formalities and requirements imposed
in connection with the importation and exportation of goods shall be consistent with its
rights and obligations under GATT 1994.

2. Each Party shall not require consular transactions, including related fees and
charges, in connection with the importation of any good of the other Party.

3. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, in accordance with its respective laws
and regulations, make a list of current fees and charges that it imposes in connection
with importation and exportation, and make such information publicly available on the
internet or other similar means.

Article 3.6: Non-Tariff Measures
1. Each Party shall not adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the
importation of any good of the other Party or on the exportation or sale for export of any

good destined for the territory of the other Party, except in accordance with its rights

6

and obligations under the WTO Agreement or this Agreement. To this end, Article XI
of GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes shall be incorporated into and shall form part
of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. The Parties shall not adopt or maintain any other non-tariff measures on the
importation of any good of the Party or on the exportation of any good destined to the
territory of the other Party, except in accordance with its obligations under the WTO
Agreement or this Agreement.

3. Each Party shall ensure the transparency of its non-tariff measures permitted in
paragraph 1 and that any such measures are not prepared, adopted or applied with a
view to or with the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

Article 3.7: Import Licensing

1. The Parties may not adopt or maintain a measure that is inconsistent with the
Import Licensing Agreement.

2. Each Party shall ensure that all automatic and non-automatic import licensing
measures are implemented in a transparent and predictable manner, and applied in
accordance with the Import Licensing Agreement.

3. Each Party shall notify the other Party of its existing import licensing
procedures, unless these were already notified or provided under Articles 5 or 7.3 of the
Import Licensing Agreement. The notification shall contain the same information as
referred to in Articles 5 or 7.3 of the Import Licensing Agreement.

4. On request of the other Party, a Party shall, promptly and to the extent possible,
respond to the request of that other Party for information on import licensing
requirements of general application.
Article 3.8: Agricultural Export Subsidies

The Parties shall not introduce or maintain any export subsidies on any
agricultural goods.
Article 3.9: Classification of Goods and Transposition of Schedules of Tariff

Commitments

1. The classification of goods traded between the Parties shall be in conformity
with the HS and its amendments.

2. The Parties shall mutually decide whether any revisions are necessary to
implement Annex 3-A due to periodic amendments or transposition of the HS.

3. The transposition of the schedules of tariff commitments shall be carried out in
accordance with the methodologies and procedures adopted by the Committee on Trade
in Goods. The said methodologies and procedures may provide for the timely
circulation of the draft schedule of tariff commitments, the provision of comments by
the other Party on the aforementioned draft schedule, and the exchange of correlation
table for the transposition.

4. If the Parties decide that revisions are necessary in accordance with paragraph 2,
the Parties, through the Committee on Trade in Goods shall endorse and promptly
publish such revisions.

Article 3.10: Geographical Indications

1. Each Party shall provide the means for persons of the other Party to apply for
protection of geographical indications. Each Party shall accept applications, without the
requirement for intercession by a Party on behalf of its persons.

2. The terms listed in Annex 3.10-A and Annex 3.10-B are respectively
geographical indications of Chile and Indonesia, within the meaning of Article 22.1 of
the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, contained in
Annex IC to the WTO Agreement (TRIPS Agreement). Subject to the laws and
regulations of each Party, in a manner that is consistent with the TRIPS Agreement,
such terms shall be protected as geographical indications in the territory of the other
Party.

3. On request of a Party, the Commission may decide to add to, or remove from
Annex 3.10-A and Annex 3.10-B, geographical indications.
Article 3.11: Committee on Trade in Goods

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade in Goods (Committee),
which shall comprise representatives of the Parties.

2. Under the framework of this Committee there are three Sub-Committees:

(a) the Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin set out in Article 4.15 (Sub-
Committee on Rules of Origin);

(b) the Sub-Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures set out in
Article 6.10 (Sub-Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures);
and

(c) the Sub-Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade set out in Article 7.13
(Sub-Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade).

3. For the purposes of the effective implementation and operation of this Chapter,
the functions of the Committee shall be:

(a) monitoring the implementation and operation of this Chapter and
Chapters 4 (Rules of Origin), 6 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures)
and 7 (Technical Barriers to Trade);

(b) consulting any issues related to this Chapter and its Sub-Committees;

(c) reporting the conclusions and the outcome of discussions to the
Commission;

(d) identifying and recommending measures to promote and _ facilitate
improved market access, including any improvement of tariff
commitments under Article 3.4;

(e) assessing barriers to trade in goods between the Parties, especially those
related to the application of non-tariff measures, and, if appropriate,
referring such matters to the Commission for its consideration;

(f) receiving reports from, and reviewing the work of the sub-committees
referred to in paragraph 2; and

(g) carrying out other functions as may be delegated by the Commission.

4. The Committee shall meet at such venue and time in person or by any other
means as may be agreed by the Parties.

Article 3.12: Contact Points

1. Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communication between
the Parties on any matter relating to this Chapter.

2. If a Party considers that any proposed or actual measure of the other Party may
materially affect trade in goods between them, that Party may, through the contact point,
request detailed information relating to that measure and, if necessary, request
consultations with a view to resolving any concern about the measure. The other Party
shall respond promptly to such requests for information and consultation.

CHAPTER 4
RULES OF ORIGIN

Section A: Rules of Origin

Article 4.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

CIF means the value of the good imported and includes the cost of insurance and
freight up to the port or place of entry in the country of importation;

Competent Authority means the Governmental authority that, according to the laws
and regulations of each Party, is responsible for the issuing of a certificate of origin or

for the designation of certification entities or bodies:

(a) for Chile, the General Directorate of International Economic Affairs,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or its successor; and

(b) for Indonesia, the Ministry of Trade, or its successor,

FOB means the free-on-board value of the good, inclusive of the cost of transport to the
port or site of final shipment abroad;

fungible goods or materials mean goods or materials that are interchangeable for
commercial purposes and whose properties are essentially identical;

good means any material and product which can be wholly obtained or produced, or
manufactured, even if they are intended for later use in another manufacturing
operation;

indirect materials mean a good used in the production, testing or inspection of another
good but not physically incorporated into the good, or a good used in the maintenance
of buildings or the operation of equipment associated with the production of a good,
including:

(a) fuel, energy, catalysts and solvents;

(b) equipment, devices and supplies used for testing or inspection of the
goods;

(c) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and supplies;
(d) tools, dies and moulds;

21

(e) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and
buildings;

(f) lubricants, greases, compounding materials and other materials used in
production or used to operate equipment and buildings; and

(g) any other goods which are not incorporated into the good but whose use
in the production of the good can reasonably be demonstrated to be a part
of that production;

material means a good that is used in the production of another good;

packing materials and containers for shipment mean goods used to protect a good
during its transportation, other than containers and packaging materials used for retail
sale;

preferential treatment means the rate of customs duties applicable to an originating
good of the exporting Party in accordance with Article 3.4 (Reduction and/or
Elimination of Customs Duties); and

production means methods of obtaining goods including, but not limited to growing,
raising, mining, harvesting, fishing, farming, trapping, hunting, capturing, aquaculture,
gathering, collecting, breeding, extracting, manufacturing, processing or assembling a
good.

Article 4.2: Origin Criteria

Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, a good shall qualify as an
originating good of a Party if the good is:

(a) wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of that Party as
defined in Article 4.3;

(b) produced entirely in the territory of that Party exclusively from
originating materials; or

(c) produced entirely in the territory of that Party using non-originating
materials, provided that the good satisfies the product specific rules set

out in Annex 4-A,

and meets the other applicable provisions of this Chapter.

22

Article 4.3: Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

The following goods shall be considered as wholly obtained or produced entirely

in the territory of a Party:

(a) plants, plant goods and vegetable goods harvested, picked or gathered in
that Party;

(b) live animals born and raised in that Party;

(c) goods obtained from live animals referred to in subparagraph (b);

(d) goods obtained from hunting, trapping, fishing, aquaculture, gathering or
capturing and farming conducted in that Party;

(e) minerals and other naturally occurring substances, not included in
subparagraphs (a) to (d), extracted or taken from the seabed of that Party;

(f) goods taken from the waters, seabed or beneath the seabed outside the
territorial waters of that Party, provided that such Party has the rights to
exploit such waters, seabed and beneath the seabed in accordance with
international law;

(g) goods of sea-fishing, such as fish, shellfish and other marine life or
marine goods taken from the high seas by any vessel registered with that
Party and entitled to fly the flag of that Party;

(h) goods obtained, processed or produced on board a factory ship registered
or recorded with that Party or entitled to fly the flag of that Party,
exclusively from products referred to in subparagraph (g);

(1) goods which are:

(1) waste and scrap derived from production and consumption in that
Party provided that such goods can no longer perform their
original purpose nor are capable of being restored or repaired and
are fit only for the recovery of raw materials; or

(11) used goods collected in that Party provided that such goods can
no longer perform their original purpose nor are capable of being
restored or repaired and are fit only for the recovery of raw
materials;

and

23

(j) goods obtained or produced in the territory of that Party solely from
goods referred to in subparagraphs (a) to (i) or from their derivatives, at
any stage of production.

Article 4.4: Goods Not Wholly Obtained or Produced

1. For the purposes of Article 4.2(c), the product specific rules set out in Annex 4-
A requiring that the materials used undergo a change in tariff classification or a specific
manufacturing or processing operation shall apply only to non-originating materials.

2. Where Annex 4-A provides a choice of rule between a qualifying value content,
a change in tariff classification, a specific process of production, or a combination of
any of these, a Party shall permit the producer or exporter of the good to decide which
rule to use in determining if the good is an originating good.

Article 4.5: Qualifying Value Content

For the purposes of Article 4.2(c), the qualifying value content of a good shall be
calculated as follows:

FOB - VNM
QVC Sete ennnnn-n=------ x 100
FOB
where:
QVC - is the qualifying value of a good content expressed as a
percentage;
FOB - is the Free On Board value of the final good; and
VNM - is the CIF value of the non-originating materials at the time

of importation or the earliest ascertained price paid or
payable in the Party where the production takes place for all
non-originating materials, parts or produce that are acquired
by the producer in the production of the good. When the
producer of a good acquires non-originating materials within
that Party the value of such materials shall not include
freight, insurance, packing costs and any other costs incurred
in transporting the material from the supplier’s warehouse to

the producer’s location.

24

Article 4.6: Indirect Materials

Any indirect material used in the production of a good shall be treated as
originating material, irrespective of whether such indirect material originates from a
non-Party.

Article 4.7: Minimal Operations and Processes that Do Not Confer Origin

The following minimal operations or processes, undertaken exclusively by itself
or in combination, do not confer origin:

(a) operations to ensure the preservation of products in good condition
during transport and storage such as drying, freezing, ventilation, chilling
and like operations;

(b) sifting, classifying, washing, cutting, slitting, bending, coiling or
uncoiling, sharpening, simple grinding, slicing;

(c) cleaning, including removal of oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;
(d) painting and polishing operations;
(e) testing or calibration;

(f) placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or
boards and all other simple packaging operations;

(g) simple mixing’ of goods, whether or not of different kinds;

(h) simple assembly‘ of parts of products to constitute a complete good or
disassembly of products into parts;

(1) changes of packing, unpacking or repacking operations, and breaking up
and assembly of consignments;

(j) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing
signs on goods or their packaging;

3 “Simple mixing” generally describes an activity which does not need special skills, machine,
apparatus or equipment especially produce or install for carrying out the activity. However, simple
mixing does not include chemical reaction. Chemical reaction means a process (including a biochemical
process) which results in a molecule with a new structure by breaking intramolecular bonds and by
forming new intramolecular bonds, or by altering the spatial arrangement of atoms in a molecule.

4 “Simple assembly” generally describes an activity which does not need special skills, machines,
apparatus or equipment especially produced or installed for carrying out the activity.

25

(k) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing and glazing of cereals and
rice; and

(1) mere dilution with water or another substance that does not materially
alter the characteristics of the goods.

Article 4.8: Accumulation

1. An originating good of a Party which is used in the processing or production in
the territory of the other Party as material for finished goods shall be deemed as a
material originating in the territory of the latter Party where the working or processing
of the finished goods has taken place.

2. The Parties shall endeavour to establish provisions regarding accumulation with
non-Parties and its implementation under the Sub-Committee of Rules of Origin, as set
out in Article 4.15.

Article 4.9: De Minimis

A good that does not undergo a change in tariff classification requirement as set
out in Annex 4-A shall be considered as originating if:

(a) for a good, other than that provided for in Chapters 50 to 63 of the HS
Code, the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of
the good that did not undergo the required change in tariff classification
does not exceed 10 per cent of the FOB value of the good;

(b) for a good provided for in Chapters 50 to 63 of the HS Code, the weight
of all non-originating materials used in its production that did not
undergo the required change in tariff classification does not exceed 10
per cent of the total weight of the good,

and the good meets all other applicable criteria set forth in this Chapter for qualifying as
an originating good.

Article 4.10: Fungible Goods and Materials

1. The determination of whether fungible goods or materials are originating goods
shall be made either by physical segregation of each of the materials, or through the use
of an inventory management method recognised in the generally accepted accounting
principles of the Party in which the production is performed or otherwise accepted by
that Party.

26

2. The method of inventory management chosen by the exporter must be
maintained for at least one year.

Article 4.11: Accessories, Spare Parts, Tools and Instructional or Information
Materials

1. Accessories, spare parts, tools, instructional or other information materials
delivered with a good that form part of the good’s standard accessories, spare parts, or
tools, shall be regarded as a part of the good, and shall be disregarded in determining
whether or not all the non-originating materials used in the production of the originating
goods undergo the applicable change in tariff classification provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, tools, instructional or other information
materials are classified with and not invoiced separately from the good;
and

(b) the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts, tools, instructional
or other information materials are customary for the good.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if the goods are subject to qualifying value content
requirement, the value of the accessories, spare parts, or tools shall be taken into
account as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, in calculating
the qualifying value content of the goods.

Article 4.12: Treatment of Packages, Packing Materials and Containers

1. If a good is subject to the qualifying value content requirement, the value of the
packages and packing materials for retail sale, shall be taken into account in
determining the origin of such good as originating or non-originating, as the case may
be, provided that the packages and packing materials are considered to be forming a
whole with the good.

2. If a good is subject to the change in tariff classification criterion, packages and
packing materials for retail sale classified together with the packaged good, shall not be

taken into account in determining the origin of such good.

3. Packing materials and containers used exclusively for the transportation of a
good shall not be taken into account in determining the origin of such good.

27

Article 4.13: Direct Consignment

1. A good shall be deemed as directly consigned from the exporting Party to the
importing Party if:

(a) the good is transported without passing through the territory of any non-
Party; or

(b) the good is transported for the purpose of transit through a non-Party
with or without transshipment or temporary storage in such non-Party,
provided that the good has not undergone any operation in the territory of
the non-Party other than unloading, reloading and _ splitting-up/bulk
breaking or any operation required to keep it in good conditions.

2. In the case where an originating good of the exporting Party is imported through
one or more non-Parties, the Customs Authority of the importing Party may require
importers, who claim the preferential tariff treatment for the good, to submit supporting
documentation, such as:

(a) copy of through bill of lading issued in the exporting Party, transport
documents, warehouse documents or other appropriate commercial
document; or

(b) if any, a certificate or any other information given by the customs
authorities of such non-Parties or other relevant entities, which evidence
that the good has not undergone operations other than unloading,
reloading and any other operation to preserve it in good conditions in
those non-Parties.

Article 4.14: Certificate of Origin

A claim that a good is eligible for preferential treatment under this Agreement
shall be supported by a Certificate of Origin in the form as prescribed in Annex 4-B,
issued by the Competent Authority of the exporting Party in accordance with the
Operational Certification Procedures as set out in Section B of this Chapter.
Article 4.15: Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and operation of this Chapter,
the Parties hereby establish a Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin, comprising of

representatives of each Party.

2. The functions of the Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin shall be to:

28

(a) review the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

(b) report its findings to the Committee on Trade in Goods;

(c) identify areas, relating to this Chapter, to be improved for facilitating
trade in goods between the Parties;

(d) carry out other functions as may be delegated by the Committee on Trade
in Goods in accordance with Article 3.12.3(g); and

(e) keep Annex 4-A updated on the basis of transposition of the Harmonised
System.

3. The Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin shall meet at such venues and times as

may be agreed by the Parties.

29

Section B: Operational Certification Procedure

For the purposes of implementing the Rules of Origin applicable for this
Agreement, the following operational procedures on the issuance and verification of the
Certificate of Origin and other related administrative matters shall apply:

Rule 1: Certification of Origin

(1)

(il)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)
(vil)

(viii)

(ix)

The Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the Competent Authority of
the exporting Party.

Each Party shall inform to the other Party of the names and addresses of
its respective Competent Authority and shall provide the official seals
used by such authority. Any change in names, addresses or official seals
shall be promptly informed in the same manner.

The Certificate of Origin shall be valid for a period of one year from the
date of its issuance.

The Certificate of Origin shall be submitted to the Customs Authority of
the importing Party at the time the import declaration of the good is made
within its validity period.

The Certificate of Origin shall be issued on International Organisation
for Standardisation (ISO) A4 size in the case of Indonesia or (ISO) letter
size paper in the case of Chile. The Certificate of Origin shall be issued
in conformity to the form as shown in Annex 4-B.

The Certificate of Origin shall be completed in the English language.

Each Certificate of Origin shall bear a unique serial reference number
separately given by each place or office of issuance.

Each Certificate of Origin shall bear an authorised signature and official
seal of the Competent Authority. The signature and official seal may be
applied digitally.

For the purpose of checking the Certificate of Origin, the Parties shall
provide websites or other appropriate system as the Parties may agree,
containing some key information of the Certificate of Origin issued by
exporting Party such as reference number, HS Code, description of
goods, quantity, FOB value, date of issuance and name of the exporter.

30

(x) The Parties, to the extent possible, should implement an electronic
system of certification of origin. The Parties also recognise the validity of
the digital signature.

Rule 2: Treatment of Erroneous Declaration in the Certificate of Origin

When a Certificate of Origin has errors and before that the Certificate of Origin
has been submitted to the Customs Authority of the importing Party, a new Certificate
of Origin shall be issued to replace the erroneous one. The new Certificate of Origin
shall bear the reference number and the date of issuance of the original Certificate of
Origin. The words “replaced C/O No... issued date...” shall be endorsed. The new
Certificate of Origin shall take effect from the date of issuance of the original Certificate
of Origin.

Neither erasures nor superimpositions shall be allowed on the Certificate of
Origin. Any alteration shall be made by striking out the erroneous information and
making any required addition. Such alteration shall be approved by a person authorised
to sign the Certificate of Origin and certified by the appropriate Competent Authority.
Unused spaces shall be crossed out to prevent any subsequent addition.

Rule 3: Obligations of the Competent Authority

The Competent Authority shall carry out proper examination in accordance with
the laws and regulations of the exporting Party upon each application for the Certificate
of Origin to ensure that:

(1) the Certificate of Origin is duly completed and signed by the authorised
signatory;

(ii) the origin of the good is in conformity with the provisions of this
Agreement;

(iii) other statements on the Certificate of Origin correspond to the
appropriate-supporting documentary evidence submitted; and

(iv) multiple items declared on the same Certificate of Origin, shall be
allowed, provided that each item must qualify separately in its own right.

Rule 4: Issuance of Certificate of Origin

(1) The Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the Competent Authority of
the exporting Party at the time of exportation or within three days from
the date of shipment.

31

(il)

If a Certificate of Origin has not been issued at the time of exportation or
within three days from the date of shipment, due to involuntary errors or
omissions or other valid causes, the Certificate of Origin may be issued
retroactively but no longer than one year from the date of shipment and
shall be duly and prominently marked “Issued Retroactively”.

Rule 5: Certified Copy

(i)

(il)

In the event of theft, loss or destruction of the Certificate of Origin, the
exporter, by stating the reasons for the request, may apply to the
Competent Authority which issued the Certificate of Origin for a
certified copy of the original Certificate of Origin to be made out on the
basis of the export documents in possession of the Competent Authority.

The certified copy of the original Certificate of Origin shall be endorsed
with an official signature and seal and bear the words “CERTIFIED
COPY” and the date of issuance of the original Certificate of Origin and
shall take effect from the date of issuance of the original Certificate of
Origin.

Rule 6: Exceptions

(i)

(ii)

In the case of consignments of goods originating in the exporting Party
and not exceeding USD 200 FOB, the requirement of a Certificate of
Origin shall be waived, provided that the importation does not form part
of one or more importations that may reasonably be considered to have
been undertaken or arranged for the purpose of avoiding the certification
requirements of this Chapter.

An importation of originating goods of the exporting Party, for which the
Customs Authority of the importing Party has waived the requirement for
a Certificate of Origin.

Rule 7: Claim for Preferential Tariff Treatment

For the purposes of claiming preferential tariff treatment, the importer shall
submit to the Customs Authority of the importing Party at the time of import, a customs
declaration, a Certificate of Origin including supporting documentation and other
documents as required in accordance with the laws and regulations of the importing

Party.

32

Rule 8: Minor Discrepancies

(1) Minor discrepancies” in the Certificate of Origin may not, ipso facto,
invalidate the Certificate of Origin, if it does, in fact, correspond to the
goods submitted.

(ii) For multiple goods declared under the same Certificate of Origin, minor
discrepancies encountered with one of the goods listed shall not affect or
delay the granting of preferential tariff treatment and customs clearance
of the remaining goods listed in the Certificate of Origin.

Rule 9: Verification of Origin

(i) For the purposes of determining whether a good imported from the
exporting Party under preferential tariff treatment qualifies as an
originating good of the exporting Party, the Customs Authority of the
importing Party may request information relating to the origin of the
good from the Competent Authority of the exporting Party on the basis of
a Certificate of Origin, if it has reasonable doubt as to the authenticity of
the Certificate of Origin or the accuracy of the information included in
the Certificate of Origin.

(ii) | For the purposes of paragraph (i), the Competent Authority of the
exporting Party shall provide the information requested within a period
of three months from the date of receipt of the request. If the Customs
Authority of the importing Party considers necessary, it may require
additional information relating to the origin of the good. If additional
information is requested by the Customs Authority of the importing
Party, the Competent Authority of the exporting Party shall, in
accordance with the laws and regulations of the exporting Party, provide
the information requested within a period of two months from the date of
receipt of the request.

(111) |For the purposes of paragraph (11), the Competent Authority of the
exporting Party may request the exporter to whom the Certificate of
Origin has been issued, to provide the requested information.

(iv) The request of information in accordance with paragraph (1) shall not
preclude the use of the verification method provided for in Rule 10.

> For greater certainty, minor discrepancies refer to any discordance between the Certificate of

Origin and the commercial documents related to the importation of the goods and which do not affect the
origin of the goods themselves.

33

Rule 10: Verification Visit

(1)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

The Customs Authority of the importing Party may:

(a)

(b)

conduct a visit, in case of which it shall deliver a written
communication with such request to the Competent Authority of
the exporting Party at least 40 days in advance of the proposed date
of the visit, the receipt of which is to be confirmed by the
Competent Authority of the exporting Party. The Competent
Authority of the exporting Party shall request the written consent of
the exporter or the producer of the good in the exporting Party
whose premises are to be visited; and

request to the Competent Authority of the exporting Party to
provide information relating to the origin of the good in its
possession during the visit pursuant to subparagraph (a).

The communication referred to in paragraph (1) shall include:

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

(e)

the identity of the Customs Authority issuing the communication;

the name of the exporter whose premises are requested to be
visited;

the proposed date and place of the visit;
the objective and scope of the proposed visit, including specific
reference to the good subject to verification, referred to in the

Certificate of Origin; and

the names and titles of the officials of the Customs Authority of the
importing Party to be present during the visit.

The Competent Authority of the exporting Party shall respond in writing
to the Customs Authority of the importing Party, within 30 days from the
receipt of the communication referred to in paragraph (11), if the exporter
or producer accepts or refuses the visit requested pursuant to paragraph

(i).

For the compliance of subparagraph (i)(a), the Competent Authority of
the exporting Party shall collect and provide information relating to the
origin of a good, and check, for that purpose, the facilities used in the
production of the good, through a visit with the Customs Authority of the
importing Party to the premises of the exporter to whom the Certificate
of Origin has been issued.

34

(v)

The Competent Authority of the exporting Party shall, in accordance with
the laws and regulations of the exporting Party, provide information
within 45 days or any other mutually agreed period from the last day of
the visit, to the Customs Authority of the importing Party pursuant to

paragraph (1).

Rule 11: Determination of Origin and Preferential Tariff Treatment

(1)

(il)

(iii)

(iv)

The Customs Authority of the importing Party may deny preferential
tariff treatment to a good for which an importer claims preferential tariff
treatment if the good does not qualify as an originating good of the
exporting Party or if the importer fails to comply with any of the relevant
requirements of this Chapter.

The Customs Authority of the importing Party may determine that a good
does not qualify as an originating good of the exporting Party and may
deny preferential tariff treatment in the following cases:

(a) if the Competent Authority of the exporting Party fails to respond
to the request within the period referred to in paragraph (i1) of Rule
9 or paragraph (111) of Rule 10;

(b) if the Competent Authority of the exporting Party refuses to
conduct a visit, or fails to respond to the communication referred to
in paragraph (1) of Rule 9 within the period referred to in paragraph
(111) of Rule 10; or

(c) if the information provided to the Customs Authority of the
importing Party pursuant to Rule 9 or 10, is not sufficient to prove
that the good qualifies as an originating good of the exporting
Party.

In such cases, a written determination thereof shall be sent to the
Competent Authority of the exporting Party.

The Customs Authority of the importing Party shall make a written
determination of whether or not the good qualifies as an originating good
of the exporting Party including findings of fact and the legal basis for
the determination as expeditiously as possible and no later than 45 days
after it receives the information necessary to make the determination.

Notwithstanding paragraph (111), the Customs Authority of the importing
Party shall provide that the verification process, including a written
determination, shall be concluded no later than 365 days after the first
request for information.

35

(v)

The Competent Authority of the exporting Party shall, when it cancels
the decision to issue the Certificate of Origin, promptly notify the
cancellation to the exporter to whom the Certificate of Origin has been
issued, and to the Customs Authority of the importing Party except where
the Certificate of Origin has been returned to the Competent Authority of
the exporting Party. The Customs Authority of the importing Party may
deny preferential tariff treatment when it receives the notification.

Rule 12: Records and Confidentiality

For the purposes of the verification of origin procedure:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

The Certificate of Origin and all supporting documents shall be kept by
the Competent Authority and the exporter for three years from the date of
issuance;

An importer claiming preferential tariff treatment for goods imported into
the territory of a Party shall maintain, for three years after the date of
importation of the goods, a Certificate of Origin and all other documents
that the Party may require relating to the importation of the goods, in
accordance to the laws and regulations of each Party;

All records identified in paragraphs (1) and (11) may be maintained in
paper or digital form, in accordance to the laws and regulations of each
Party;

Information relating to the validity of the Certificate of Origin shall be
furnished upon request.

Any confidential information shall be treated as such in accordance with
the laws and regulations of each Party and shall only be used for the
purposes of the validation of the Certificate of Origin.

Rule 13: Sanctions against False Declaration

(i)

(il)

Each Party shall establish or maintain, in accordance with its laws and
regulations, appropriate penalties or other sanctions against its exporters
to whom a Certificate of Origin has been issued, for providing false
declaration or documents to the Competent Authority of the exporting
Party.

Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations, take
measures which it considers appropriate against its exporters to whom a

Certificate of Origin has been issued if they fail to notify in writing to the

36

(111)

Competent Authority of the exporting Party without delay, after having
known that such good does not qualify as an originating good of the
exporting Party.

When the exporter repeatedly provided false information or documents,
the Competent Authority may temporarily suspend the issuance of a new
Certificate of Origin.

Rule 14: Obligations of the Exporter

The exporter to whom a Certificate of Origin has been issued in the exporting
Party referred to in Rule 1, shall notify in writing to the Competent Authority of the
exporting Party without delay, when such exporter knows that such good does not
qualify as an originating good of the exporting Party.

Rule 15: Obligations of the Importer

Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, the Customs Authority of the
importing Party shall require an importer who claims preferential tariff treatment for
goods imported from the other Party to:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

make a customs declaration, based on a valid Certificate of Origin, that
the goods qualify as an originating good of the exporting Party;

have the Certificate of Origin in its possession at the time the declaration
is made;

provide the Certificate of Origin on request of the Customs Authority of
the importing Party; and

promptly notify the Customs Authority and pay any duties owing if the
importer has a reason to believe that the Certificate of Origin on which a
declaration was based contains information that is not correct.

Rule 16: Customs Duty Refund

(i)

for Chile, if an originating good was imported into the territory of that
Party but no claim for preferential tariff treatment was made at the time
of importation, the importer of the good may, no later than one year after
the date on which the good was imported, apply for a refund of any
excess duties paid to the Customs Authority of the importing Party as the
result of the good not having been accorded preferential tariff treatment,
on presentation of:

37

(a) a written declaration that the good qualified as originating at the
time of importation;

(b) a Certificate of Origin; and

(c) such other documents relating to the importation of the good as the
importing Party may require.

(i1) for Indonesia, the importer may apply for refund of any excess duty paid
through a review and appeal mechanism relating to a customs decision on
preferential tariff treatment in accordance with its laws and regulations.

Rule 17: Third Country Invoicing

(1) The Customs Authority of the importing Party shall accept a Certificate
of Origin in cases where the invoice is issued by a company located in a
third country provided that the goods meet the requirements of this
Chapter.

(ii) The exporter shall indicate “THIRD COUNTRY INVOICING” in the
Certificate of Origin.

Rule 18: Acceptance of Copies

Each Party shall, where appropriate, endeavour to accept paper or electronic
copies of the Certificate of Origin and the supporting documentation required for
imported goods.

Rule 19: Goods in Transit or Storage

Preferential tariff treatment shall be accorded for the originating goods, which
are in transit from the exporting Party to the importing Party or in temporary storage in
bonded areas in the importing Party on the date of entry into force of this Agreement,
subject to the submission of a Certificate of Origin issued retroactively to the Customs
Authority of the importing Party in accordance with its laws and regulations.

38

CHAPTER 5

CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND COOPERATION

Article 5.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

customs administration means the authority that according to the legislation of each
Party is responsible for the administration and enforcement of their customs laws:

(a) for Chile, the National Customs Service or its successor notified in
writing to Indonesia; and

(b) for Indonesia, the Directorate General of Customs and Excise, Ministry
of Finance or its successor notified in writing to Chile.

customs law means such laws and regulations administered, applied and enforced by
the customs administration of each Party concerning the importation, exportation, and
transit/transshipment of goods, as they relate to customs duties, charges and other taxes,
or to prohibitions, restrictions and other similar controls with respect to the movement
of controlled items across the boundary of the customs territory of each Party; and
customs procedures mean the treatment applied by the customs administration of each
Party to goods and means of transport, which are subject to customs control.
Article 5.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) simplify and harmonise, to the extent possible, customs procedures of the
Parties;

(b) ensure consistency, predictability and transparency in the application of
customs law of the Parties;

(c) ensure efficient and expeditious release and clearance of goods; and

(d) facilitate trade between the Parties.

89

Article 5.3: Scope and Coverage

This Chapter shall apply, in accordance with the respective laws and regulations
of the Parties, to customs procedures applied to goods traded between them.

Article 5.4: Customs Valuation

The Parties shall determine the customs value of goods traded between them in
accordance with the provisions of Article VII of GATT 1994 and the Customs
Valuation Agreement.

Article 5.5: Customs Procedures

1. The customs administration of a Party shall ensure that their customs procedures
and practices are consistent, predictable, and transparent, and facilitate trade, including
the expeditious release and clearance of goods.

2. Customs procedures of each Party shall endeavour, where possible and to the
extent permitted by its respective customs law, conform to the standards and
recommended practices established by the World Customs Organisation (WCO) and
under other relevant international agreements to which the Parties are party.

3. The customs administration of each Party shall, to the extent possible, review its
customs procedures and practices with a view to their simplification to facilitate trade.
Article 5.6: Release of Goods

1. In order to facilitate trade between the Parties, each Party shall adopt or maintain
simplified customs procedures for the efficient release of goods.

2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that:

(a) provide for the release of goods within a period no greater than that
required to ensure compliance with its customs law;

(b) provide for customs information to be submitted and processed manually
or electronically before the goods arrive in order for them to be released
on their arrival; and

(c) allow goods to be released at the point of arrival, without temporary

transfer to warehouses or other facilities, provided all requirements are
met.

90

Article 5.7: Risk Management

In order to facilitate the release of goods traded between the Parties, the customs
administration of each Party shall adopt or maintain a risk management method, that
considers a system for assessment and targeting that enables its customs administration
to focus its inspection activities on high-risk consignments and that simplifies the
clearance and movement of low-risk consignments.

Article 5.8: Advance Rulings

1. The customs administration of the Parties shall issue, prior to the importation of
a good into their territories, a written advance ruling, upon a written request of an
importer in its territory, in relation to:

(a) tariff classification; and

(b) the application of valuation criteria for a particular case, in accordance
with the application of the provisions set forth in the Customs Valuation
Agreement.

2. For the issuance of the advance ruling, each Party shall apply its respective laws
and procedures.
Article 5.9: Review and Appeal

Each Party shall ensure that with respect to its determinations on customs
matters and in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Party, importers in its
territory have access to:

(a) administrative review within the customs administration that issued the
decision, subject to review or, where applicable, the higher authority
supervising the administration; and

(b) judicial review of the determination or decision taken at the final level of
administrative review.

Article 5.10: Publication and Enquiry Points

For the purposes of this Chapter, in accordance with the respective laws and
regulations of the Parties, the customs administration of each Party shall:

(a) publish on the internet or in print, its customs laws, regulations and
general administrative procedures applied or enforced by its customs

91

administration, not including law enforcement procedures and internal
operational guidelines; and

(b) designate one or more enquiry points to address enquiries from interested
persons of each Party concerning customs matters, and shall make
available on the internet or in print, information on the procedures for
making such enquiries.

Article 5.11: Confidentiality

1. If a Party that provides information to the other Party, in accordance with this
Chapter, designates the information as confidential, the other Party shall keep the
information confidential. The Party providing the information may require the other
Party to furnish written assurance that the information shall be held in confidence, shall
only be used for the purpose the other Party specified in its request for information, and
shall not be disclosed without the specific permission of the Party that provided the
information or the person that provided the information to that Party.

2. A Party may decline to provide information that the other Party has requested if
that Party has failed to act in conformity with paragraph 1, and when the disclosure is
contrary to its laws and regulations.

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for protecting, from unauthorised
disclosure, confidential information submitted in accordance with the administration of
the customs law of that Party, including information of which the disclosure could
prejudice the competitive position of the person providing the information.

Article 5.12: Customs Cooperation

1. The customs administration of each Party may, as deemed appropriate, assist the
customs administration of the other Party, in relation to the implementation and
operation of this Chapter.

2. The customs administration of each Party, to the extent possible, when new or
amended law or regulation, or procedures governing the movement of goods are
implemented, shall provide information to the customs administration of the other Party.

3. The customs administrations of the Parties shall encourage consultations with
each other regarding significant customs issues that affect trade between the Parties.

4. The customs administration of the Parties shall endeavour to establish or
maintain channels of communication for customs cooperation, including the
establishment of contact points in order to facilitate the rapid and secure exchange of
information and improve coordination on importation issues.

92

CHAPTER 6

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

Article 6.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

the definitions in Annex A to the SPS Agreement are incorporated into
this Chapter and shall form part of this Chapter, mutatis mutandis; and

the relevant definitions developed by the World Organisation for Animal
Health (OIE), International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC), and
Codex Alimentarius Commission (Codex), shall apply in the
implementation of this Chapter.

Article 6.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

facilitate trade among the Parties while protecting human, animal or plant
life or health in the territory of the Parties;

uphold and enhance implementation of the SPS Agreement and
applicable international standards, guidelines and recommendations
developed by relevant international organisations (OIE, IPPC and
Codex);

provide means to improve communication, cooperation and resolution of
sanitary and phytosanitary issues between the Parties; and

increase mutual understanding of the regulations and procedures of each
Party relating to the implementation of sanitary and phytosanitary
measures.

Article 6.3: Scope

This Chapter shall apply to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures of a Party
that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade among the Parties.

93

Article 6.4: General Provisions

1. The Parties reaffirm the rights and obligations relating to sanitary and
phytosanitary measures under the SPS Agreement.

2. The Parties agree to apply the principles of the SPS Agreement in the
development, application or recognition of any sanitary and phytosanitary measures,
while protecting human, animal or plant life or health in the territory of each Party.

Article 6.5: Transparency and Exchange of Information

1. The Parties confirm their commitment to implementing the transparency
provisions set out in Article 7, Annex B to the SPS Agreement and relevant Decisions
and Recommendations on transparency adopted by the WTO Committee on Sanitary
and Phytosanitary Measures (WTO Committee on SPS).

2. The Parties shall inform in a timely and appropriate manner in writing through
the contact points, established in Article 6.11, of any significant food safety issue or
change in the sanitary and phytosanitary status in their territory that is relevant to
existing trade among them.

Article 6.6: Adaptation to Regional Conditions

The Parties recognise that the principle of adaptation to regional conditions, as
set out in Article 6 of the SPS Agreement, is an important mean to facilitate trade. To
that end, each Party shall take into account, as appropriate, standards, guidelines and
recommendations, developed by the WTO Committee on SPS and relevant international
standard-setting bodies, consistent with Annex A to the SPS Agreement.

Article 6.7: Equivalence

1. The Parties recognise that the application of equivalence, as set out in Article 4
of the SPS Agreement, is an important tool for facilitating trade for the mutual benefit
of the Parties.

2. Upon request, the Parties may enter into technical consultations with the aim of
achieving bilateral recognition of the equivalence of specified sanitary and
phytosanitary measures in line with the principle of equivalence in the SPS Agreement,
standards, guidelines, and recommendations, developed by the WTO Committee on SPS
and relevant international standard-setting bodies, consistent with Annex A to the SPS
Agreement.

94

Article 6.8: Risk Analysis

1. The Parties recognise the principle of risk assessment, as set out in Article 5 of
the SPS Agreement. Sanitary and phytosanitary measures adopted by the Parties shall
be based on assessment of risk for human, animal health and infectious diseases of
animals and pests of plants in accordance with the risk assessment techniques adopted
by the relevant international standard-setting bodies.

2. The initiation of a risk assessment process should not interrupt the existing
bilateral trade of that product, except in the case of a justified emergency situation.

3. When conducting its risk assessment, each Party shall take into account
Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the WTO Committee on SPS and
international standards, guidelines and recommendations from Codex, OJE and IPPC.

4. The Parties shall consider risk management options that are not more trade
restrictive than required to achieve the objectives of this Chapter, as set out in Article
6.2.

Article 6.9: Consultations

1. On request of a Party for consultations on any matter arising under this Chapter,
the Parties shall agree to enter into consultations by notifying the contact points
established in Article 6.11.

2. Consultations shall be carried out by the Parties, under the Sub-Committee on
Sanitary and Phytosanitary as referred to in Article 6.10, within 30 days of the receipt of
a request, unless agreed otherwise. Such consultations may be conducted via
teleconference, video conference, or any other means mutually agreed upon by the
Parties.

3. If such consultations failed to resolve the matter between the Parties, then the
interested Party could initiate the dispute settlement procedure contained in Chapter 12
(Dispute Settlement). For greater certainty, consultations under this Article should not
replace those provided in Article 12.5 (Consultations).

Article 6.10: Sub-Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. The Parties hereby establish a Sub-Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures (Sub-Committee on SPS) with the objective of ensuring the implementation

of this Chapter.

2. For the purposes of the effective implementation and operation of this Chapter,
the Sub-Committee on SPS shall be a forum for:

95

+

(a) enhancing mutual understanding of the sanitary and phytosanitary
measures of each Party and the regulatory processes that relate to those
measures;

(b) discussing on matters related to the development or application of
sanitary and phytosanitary measures that may, directly or indirectly,
affect human, animal and plant health and trade between the Parties;

(c) addressing any bilateral issues arising from the implementation of
sanitary and phytosanitary measures between the Parties;

(d) reviewing progress on addressing sanitary and phytosanitary measures
that may arise between the Competent Authorities listed in Annex 6-A,
from the implementation of sanitary and phytosanitary measures between
the Parties;

(e) coordinating technical cooperation programs on_ sanitary and
phytosanitary measures;

(f) consulting on issues, relating to the meetings of the WTO Committee on
SPS, Codex, OIE and IPPC;

(g) improving bilateral understanding related to specific implementation
issues concerning the SPS Agreement;

(h) enhancing cooperation between the agencies of the Parties responsible
for sanitary and phytosanitary measures; and

(1) reporting to the Committee on Trade in Goods on the implementation of
this Chapter.
3. The Sub-Committee on SPS shall comprise and be co-chaired by representatives

of the Competent Authorities of each Party responsible for sanitary and phytosanitary
measures, as established in Article 6.11.

4 Unless agreed otherwise by the Parties, the Sub-Committee on SPS shall meet
annually in person, via teleconference, video conference, or through any other means as
mutually determined by the Parties.

5. The Sub-Committee on SPS shall establish its own rules of procedure during its
first meeting to guide its operation. These rules may be revised or further developed at

any time.

6. The Sub-Committee on SPS may agree to establish ad hoc technical working
groups in accordance with its rules of procedure.

96

Article 6.11: Competent Authorities and Contact Points

1. The Competent Authorities responsible for the implementation of the measures
referred to in this Chapter are listed in Annex 6-A. The contact points that have the
responsibility relating to communications between the Parties are set out in Annex 6-B.

2. The Parties shall inform each other of any significant changes in the structure,
organisation and division of the competency of its Competent Authorities or contact
points.
Article 6.12: Cooperation

To facilitate the implementation of this Chapter, the Parties agree to explore

opportunities for further cooperation, collaboration and information exchange on
sanitary or phytosanitary measures of mutual interest.

97

CHAPTER 7

TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE

Article 7.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms and their definitions set out in Annex
1 to the TBT Agreement shall apply, mutatis mutandis.

Article 7.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to increase and facilitate trade by preventing
and eliminating unnecessary obstacles to trade and enhancing bilateral cooperation in
accordance with the rights and obligations of the Parties with respect to the TBT
Agreement.

Article 7.3: Scope
This Chapter applies to all standards, technical regulations, and conformity
assessment procedures, as defined in the TBT Agreement that may, directly or

indirectly, affect trade in goods between the Parties. This Chapter shall not apply to:

(a) purchasing specifications prepared by governmental bodies for
production or consumption requirements of governmental bodies; and

(b) sanitary and phytosanitary measures, which are covered by Chapter 6
(Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures).
Article 7.4: Trade Facilitation
In order to facilitate trade, the Parties shall work cooperatively in the fields of
standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, in particular, to

identify bilateral initiatives regarding standards, technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures that are appropriate for particular issues or sectors.

102

Article 7.5: Incorporation of the TBT Agreement

The Parties incorporate their existing rights and obligations with respect to each
other under the TBT Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 7.6: Standards

1. The Parties shall use international standards, guides and recommendations, or
the relevant parts of them, to the extent provided in Articles 2 and 5 and Annex 3 to the
TBT Agreement, as a basis for their technical regulations and related conformity
assessment procedures where relevant international standards, guides and
recommendations exist or their completion is imminent, except when they or their
relevant parts are ineffective or inappropriate to fulfil the legitimate objectives.

2. In determining whether an international standard, guide or recommendation as
mentioned in Articles 2 and 5 and Annex 3 to the TBT Agreement exist, each Party
shall base its determination on the principles set out in relevant Decisions and
Recommendations adopted by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade
since | January 1995.

Article 7.7: Technical Regulations

1. Each Party shall give positive consideration to accepting as equivalent technical
regulations of the other Party, even if these regulations differ from its own, provided
that it is satisfied that these regulations adequately fulfil the objectives of its own
regulations.

2. A Party shall, on request of the other Party, explain the reasons why it has not
accepted a technical regulation of the other Party as equivalent.

Article 7.8: Conformity Assessment Procedures

1. The Parties recognise that a broad range of mechanisms exist to facilitate the
acceptance of the results of conformity assessment procedures, including:

(a) arrangements between conformity assessment bodies from the territory
of each Party;

(b) agreements on mutual acceptance of the results of conformity assessment

procedures with respect to specified regulations conducted by bodies
located in the territory of the other Party;

103

(c) unilateral recognition by one Party of the results of conformity
assessments performed in the territory of the other Party, where
applicable;

(d) accreditation procedures for qualifying conformity assessment bodies and
promotion of the recognition of accreditation and certification bodies
under regional and international mutual recognition arrangements which
the Parties are members to;

(e) designating conformity assessment bodies by the government of a Party
which is located in the territory of the other Party to perform conformity
assessment procedures; and

(f) reliance on a supplier's declaration of conformity, where appropriate.

2. Each Party shall exchange information with the other Party on its experience in
the development and application of the mechanisms in paragraph 1 and other
appropriate mechanisms with a view to facilitating acceptance of the results of
conformity assessment procedures.

3. Before accepting the results of a conformity assessment procedure, and to
enhance confidence in the continued reliability of each other's conformity assessment
results, the Parties may consult with each other on matters such as the technical
competence of the conformity assessment bodies involved.

4. A Party shall, on request of the other Party, explain its reason for not accepting
the results of any conformity assessment procedures performed in the territory of the
other Party.

5. In accordance with its laws and regulations, each Party shall accredit, approve or
otherwise recognise conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the other Party on
terms no less favourable than those it accords to conformity assessment bodies in its
territory.

6. If a Party accredits, approves or otherwise recognises a body assessing
conformity with a specific technical regulation or standard in its territory and refuses to
accredit, approve, license, or otherwise recognise a body assessing conformity with that
technical regulation or standard in the territory of the other Party, it shall, on request of
that other Party, explain the reasons for its decision.

7. Each Party shall give positive consideration to a request by the other Party to
negotiate and conclude arrangements to facilitate recognition of the results of
conformity assessment procedures conducted by bodies located in the territory of the
other Party. If a Party declines such a request, it shall, on request of that other Party,
explain the reasons for its decision.

104

Article 7.9: Transparency

1. Each Party shall ensure that the information relating to technical regulations and
conformity assessment procedures is published. Such information should be made
available in print or electronically.

2. The Parties acknowledge the importance of transparency in decision-making,
including giving a meaningful opportunity to provide comments on proposed technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures. If a Party publishes a notice under
Article 2.9 or 5.6 of the TBT Agreement, it shall:

(a) include in the notice a statement describing the objective of the proposed
technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure and _ the
rationale for the approach the Party is proposing; and

(b) transmit the proposal electronically to the other Party through the enquiry
point the Party has established under Article 10 of the TBT Agreement at
the same time as it notifies WTO Members of the proposal pursuant to
the TBT Agreement.

Article 7.10: Consultations

1. Each Party shall give prompt and positive consideration to any request from the
other Party for consultations on any matter arising under this Chapter.

2. On request of a Party for consultations on any matter arising under this Chapter,
the Parties shall agree to enter into consultations by notifying the contact points
established in Article 7.14.

3. Consultations shall be carried out by the Parties, under the Sub-Committee on
Technical Barriers to Trade as referred to in Article 7.13, within 30 days of the receipt
of a request, unless agreed otherwise. Such consultations may be conducted via
teleconference, video conference, or any other means mutually agreed upon by the
Parties.

4. If such consultations failed to resolve the matter between the Parties, then the
interested Party could initiate the dispute settlement procedure contained in Chapter 12
(Dispute Settlement). For greater certainty, consultations under this Article should not
replace those provided in Article 12.5 (Consultations).

105

Article 7.11: Technical Cooperation

With a view to fulfil the objectives of this Chapter, the Parties shall, on request
of the other Party, cooperate in mutually determined terms and conditions. This may
include but is not limited to:

(a)

(b)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

exchanging legislation, regulations, rules and other information and
periodicals published by the national bodies responsible for standards,
technical regulations, conformity assessment procedures and
accreditation;

providing technical advice, information, and assistance and exchanging
experience to enhance the other Party’s system for standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures, and related activities;

examining the compatibility or equivalence of their respective technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures;

cooperation between conformity assessment bodies, both governmental
and non-governmental, in the territories of each of the Parties, enhancing
infrastructure in calibration, testing, inspection, certification and
accreditation to meet relevant international standards, recommendations
and guidelines;

increasing bilateral cooperation in the relevant international organisations
and fora dealing with the issues covered by this Chapter; and

enhancing cooperation in the development standards and conformity
assessment procedures, such as:

(1) cooperation in the development and promotion of good regulatory
practice; and

(11) transparency, including mechanisms to promote improved access
to information on standards, technical regulations and conformity

assessment procedures;

giving favourable consideration, on request of the other Party, to any
sector specific proposal for further cooperation; and

informing the other Party, as requested, about the agreements or
programs subscribed at international level in relation to TBT issues.

106

Article 7.12: Implementing Arrangements

1. The Parties, in order to enhance regulatory cooperation and in accordance with
Chapter 11 (Administration), may conclude or amend implementing arrangements to
this Chapter setting out agreed principles and procedures relating to technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures applicable to trade between them.

2. The Parties shall seek to incorporate any existing arrangements concerning
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures that are sector-specific and
specifically applicable to trade between the Parties into the implementing arrangements.

Article 7.13: Sub-Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

1. The Parties hereby establish a Sub-Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade
(Sub-Committee on TBT), which shall comprise the representatives of the Parties as
referred to in Article 7.14 (Contact Points), listed in Annex 7-A, to promote and monitor
the implementation and administration of this Chapter.

2. The Sub-Committee on TBT functions shall include:
(a) monitoring the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) promptly addressing any issue that a Party raises related to the
development, adoption, application, or enforcement of standards,
technical regulations, or conformity assessment procedures;

(c) enhancing cooperation in the development and improvement of
standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures;

(d) where appropriate, facilitating sectorial cooperation among governmental
and non-governmental conformity assessment bodies in the territory of
the Parties;

(e) exchanging information on developments in non-governmental, regional,
and multilateral fora engaged in activities related to standardisation,
technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures;

(f) taking any other steps the Parties consider may assist them in
implementing the TBT Agreement and in facilitating trade in goods
between them;

(g) reviewing this Chapter in light of any developments under the TBT

Agreement, and developing recommendations for amendments to this
Chapter in light of those developments; and

107

(h) as it considers appropriate, reporting to the Committee on Trade in
Goods on the implementation of this Chapter.

3. Unless agreed otherwise by the Parties, the Sub-Committee on TBT shall meet
annually in person, via teleconference, video conference, or through any other means as
mutually determined by the Parties.

4. The terms of reference of the Sub-Committee shall be determined in its first
meeting.
5. The Sub-Committee on TBT shall comprise the contact points, referred to in

Article 7.14 and any other Government officials that the Parties consider appropriate.

Article 7.14: Contact Points

1. The Parties shall designate a contact point or contact points, which shall
comprise relevant officials, who shall have responsibility for co-ordinating the
implementation of this Chapter.

2. The Parties shall provide each other with the name of the designated contact
point or contact points and the contact details of the relevant officials.

3. The Parties shall notify each other promptly of any changes of their contact
points or to the details of the relevant officials.

4. The Parties shall ensure that its contact point or contact points facilitate the

exchange of information on standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures, in response to all reasonable requests for such information from a Party.

108

CHAPTER 8
TRADE REMEDIES
Article 8.1: Global Safeguard Measures

1. The Parties maintain their rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT
1994 and the Safeguards Agreement.

2. Actions taken pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards
Agreement shall not be subject to Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement).

3. On request of a Party, the other Party shall promptly notify the requesting Party
of the initiation of any global safeguard investigation and the reasons for such initiation.
Such notification shall be made no later than seven days after such request.

Article 8.2: Antidumping and Countervailing Duty Matters

1. The Parties maintain their rights and obligations under the Agreement on
Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures, which are parts of the WTO Agreement.

2. Antidumping actions taken pursuant to Article VI of GATT 1994 and the
Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994 or countervailing actions
taken pursuant to Article VI of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures shall not be subject to Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement).

110

CHAPTER 9

COOPERATION

Article 9.1: Basic Principles

1. The Parties shall, in accordance with their respective laws and regulations,
promote cooperation under this Agreement for their mutual benefit in order to facilitate
trade and investment between them and to promote the well-being of the people of both
countries.

2. For this purpose, the Parties shall, where necessary and appropriate, encourage
and facilitate cooperation between entities such as business communities, including
micro, small and medium enterprises and academia.

Article 9.2: General Objectives

1. The Parties agree to establish a framework for collaborative activities as a means
to expand and enhance the benefits of this Agreement for building a comprehensive
economic partnership.

2. The Parties shall establish close cooperation aimed, inter alia, at:

(a) strengthening and building on existing and new form of cooperative
relationships between the Parties, with special emphasis on promoting
economic and social development, fostering innovation and encouraging
research and development;

(b) creating new opportunities for trade and investment;

(c) supporting the role of the private sector in promoting and building
strategic alliances to encourage mutual economic growth and
development;

(d) encouraging the presence of the Parties and their goods and services in
their respective markets of Asia Pacific and Latin America; and

(e) increasing the level of and deepening cooperation activities between the
Parties in areas of mutual interest.

111

Article 9 3: Scope

1. The Parties reaffirm the importance of all forms of cooperation, including, but
not limited to, the fields enlisted in Article 9.4.

2. Cooperation between the Parties should contribute to achieving the objectives of
the Agreement through the identification and development of innovative cooperation

programs capable of providing added value to the bilateral relationship.

3. Cooperative activities shall be agreed between the Parties and may be
materialised though not limited by the forms enlisted in Article 9.10.

4. Cooperative activities between the Parties set out in other Chapters of this
Agreement may complement cooperation between the Parties under this Chapter.
Article 9.4: Fields of Cooperation

Fields of cooperation under this Chapter shall include:

(a) trade and investment promotion and facilitation;

(b) science, innovation, research and development;

(c) agriculture, fisheries, marine products and aquaculture, food industry and
forestry;

(d) mining and mining related industry;
(e) energy;

(f) small and medium-sized enterprises;
(g) tourism;

(h) education and human capital development;

(1) trade-related gender issues;
(j) logistics and international transportation;
(1) competition policy;

(m) information and communication technology;
(n) global value chains;

112

(0) trade-related environmental issues;

(p)  trade-related labour issues;

(q) government procurement;

(r) intellectual property;

(s) trade-related strategic industries;

(t) sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

(u) technical barriers to trade measures;

(v) | development of sustainable products; and

(w) — other fields which may be mutually agreed upon by the Parties.

Article 9.5: Cooperation on Environmental Issues

1. Recognising the importance of strengthening capacity to promote sustainable
development with their three interdependent and mutually reinforcing components,
which are economic growth, social development and environmental protection, the
Parties agree to cooperate in the field of environment.

2. The Parties reaffirm their intention to continue to pursue high levels of
environmental protection and to fulfil their respective multilateral environment
commitments. Accordingly, a Party shall effectively enforce its environmental laws and
not weaken or reduce levels of environmental protection with the sole intention to
encourage investment or to seek or to enhance a competitive trade advantage of
producers or service providers operating in its territory.

3. Each Party shall respect the other Party’s sovereign right to set, administer and
enforce their own environmental laws and regulations, policies and national priorities,
and shall ensure that its environmental laws, regulations and policies not be used for
trade protectionist purposes.

4. The Parties shall endeavour to have their environmental laws, regulations, and
policies in harmony with their commitments under Multilateral Environmental
Agreements to which the Parties are party.

5. The Parties agree to cooperate in the field of environment. The aim of
cooperation shall be the prevention or reduction of contamination, and degradation of

ecosystems and natural resources, and rational use of the latter; through developing and

113

endorsing special programs and projects dealing, inter alia, with the transfer of
knowledge and technology.

6. Taking into account their national priorities and available resources, the Parties
shall explore and jointly decide areas of cooperation of mutual interest and benefit.
These areas may include, but are not limited to:

(a) climate change;

(b) biodiversity and conservation of natural resources;

(c) management of hazardous chemicals;

(d) air quality;

(e) water management;

(f) waste management;

(g) marine and coastal ecological conservation and pollution control;

(h) strategic environmental impact assessment;

(1) improvement of environmental awareness, including environmental

education and informed public participation;
(j) combating Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported Fishing;
(k) sustainable products;

(1) promote sustainable forest management and trade in legally obtained
forest products; and

(m) promotion of sustainable agriculture practices.

7. The Parties may develop new areas of cooperation through existing agreements
and through appropriate implementing arrangements.

Article 9.6: Cooperation on Labour Issues

1. The Parties share the common general objective that free trade liberalisation and
investment facilitation should lead to job creation, decent work and meaningful jobs for
workers, with terms and conditions of employment which follow the core International
Labour Organisation (ILO) labour principles. Accordingly, the Parties agree to
cooperate in the field of labour.

114

2. The Parties reaffirm their obligations as members of ILO, especially their
commitment to the principles of the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and
Rights at Work and its follow-up and shall work to ensure that its labour laws,
regulations, policies and practices are in harmony with their international labour
commitments.

3. Each Party shall respect the sovereign right of the other Party to set, administer
and enforce their own labour laws and regulations, policies and national priorities and
ensure that its labour laws, regulations, and policies shall not be used for trade
protectionist purposes.

4. The Parties shall not seek to encourage or gain trade advantage by weakening of
failing to enforce or administer its labour laws, regulations, and policies in a manner
affecting trade between the Parties.

5. Taking into account of their national priorities and available resources, the
Parties shall explore and jointly decide areas of cooperation of mutual interest and

benefit. These areas may include, but not limited to:

(a) labour laws and practices, including the promotion of labour rights,
obligations and decent work;

(b) labour consultation, exchange of information and best practices on labour
relations policies and labour management cooperation;

(c) social security; and occupational safety and health;
(d) human capital development, training, and employability; and
(e) experiences on the linkage between trade and labour and employment

issues.

Article 9.7: Cooperation on Government Procurement

1. The Parties recognise the importance of government procurement to their
economies.
2. The Parties shall cooperate on government procurement-related matters in areas

of mutual interest and benefit.

3. In order to improve transparency, the Parties shall have their respective laws and
regulations regarding government procurement available.

4. The Parties shall, subject to their respective laws and regulations, exchange
information, to the extent possible, on their respective laws and regulations on

115

government procurement, as well as any reforms to their existing government
procurement regimes.

5. The provision of this Article may be reviewed in the Commission, with a view
of enhancing the transparency and cooperation mechanisms under this Article.

Article 9.8: Cooperation on Intellectual Property Issues

1. The Parties agree that any intellectual property resulting from the cooperation
activities done in accordance with this chapter shall be regulated under mutually agreed
terms in each activity.

2. At a minimum, the terms regulated in each cooperation activity, which shall
include ownership, commercial and non-commercial use, royalties and licensing of
intellectual property.

Article 9.9: Cooperation on Global Value Chains

The Parties shall establish cooperation on:

(a) exchanging knowledge and exploring trade policy strategies aimed at
deepening the integration of Chile and Indonesia into global value
chains; and

(b) sharing knowledge and experiences regarding the interaction of trade
policy with other public policies, in the development of strategies for the
engagement in global value chains, aiming to achieve long-term
economic development for the Parties, considering all stakeholders,
including the private sector.

Article 9.10: Forms of Cooperation

1. Parties shall encourage and facilitate, as mutually agreed, the following forms of
cooperation, which may include, but are not limited to:

(a) exchange of people, information, documentation and experiences;
(b) cooperation in regional and multilateral fora;
(c) direct cooperative activities;

(d) contact with business communities, scientists and academia;

116

(e) technical assistance;

(f) dialogues, conferences, seminars and training programs with experts;
(g) development of joint research programs;

(h) facilitation of transfer of technology; and

(1) any other activities mutually agreed by the Parties.

Article 9.11: Research, Development and Innovation

Cooperation in research, development and innovation shall focus on cooperative
activities in sectors where mutual and complementary interests exist. If appropriate, the
Parties shall also promote partnerships in the support of the development of innovative
products and services and activities to promote linkage, innovation and technology
exchange.

Article 9.12: Committee on Cooperation

1. For the purposes of this Agreement, the Parties hereby establish a Committee on
Cooperation (Committee), which shall comprise representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee shall be coordinated and co-chaired by:

(a) for Chile, the General Directorate for International Economic Affairs
(DIRECON) of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or its successor; and

(b) for Indonesia, the Deputy of International Economic Cooperation of the
Coordinating Ministry for Economic Affairs, or its successor.

3. The Committee shall meet at least once a year, unless the Parties agree
otherwise. During the first meeting, the Committee shall agree on its specific terms of
reference. The Committee shall determine its functions in its terms of reference, which
may include to:

(a) determine other fields of cooperation and the cooperative activities;

(b) oversee the implementation of the strategic collaboration agreed by the
Parties;

(c) encourage the Parties to undertake cooperation activities under this
Chapter;

117

(d) maintain updated information regarding any cooperation agreement,
arrangement or instrument between the Parties;

(e) review and monitor the implementation and operation of this Chapter;
(f) exchange information on the field of cooperation; and
(g) report to the Commission the results of its meetings.

4. The Committee may agree to establish ad hoc working groups in accordance
with its terms of reference.

5. The Committee may interact, where appropriate, with the relevant entities to
address specific matters.

6. After each meeting, the Committee shall report its results to the Commission.
Consequently, the Commission may formulate recommendations regarding cooperation
activities under this Chapter in accordance with the strategic priorities of the Parties.

Article 9 13: Costs of Cooperation

1. The implementation of cooperation under this Chapter shall be subject to the
availability of funds and the respective laws and regulations of each Party.

2. Costs of cooperation under this Chapter shall be borne by the Parties within the
limits of their own capacities and through their own channels, in an equitable manner to
be mutually agreed upon between the Parties.

Article 9.14: Cooperation Contact Points

1. In order to facilitate communication for the purposes of this Chapter, each Party
shall designate a contact point.

2. The Contact Point for each Party shall be:

(a) for Chile, the General Directorate for International Economic Affairs
(DIRECON) of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or its successor; and

(b) for Indonesia, the Deputy of International Economic Cooperation of the
Coordinating Ministry for Economic Affairs, or its successor.

3. A Party may make a request for cooperation activities related to this Agreement.
4. Each Party shall notify the other Party promptly of any change of contact point.

118

Article 9.15: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

The dispute settlement procedure provided for in Chapter 12 (Dispute
Settlement) shall not apply to this Chapter.

119

CHAPTER 10

TRANSPARENCY

Article.10.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
administrative ruling of general application means an administrative ruling or
interpretation that applies to all persons and factual situations that fall generally within
its ambit and that establishes a norm of conduct, but does not include:
(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or quasi-judicial
proceeding that applies to a particular person or good of the other Party

in a specific case; or

(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or practice.

Article 10.2: Contact Points

1. The contact point referred to in Annex 10-A shall facilitate communications
between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.

2. On request of a Party, the contact point of the other Party shall identify the office
or official responsible for the matter and assist, as necessary, in facilitating
communication with the requesting Party.

Article 10.3: Publication

1. Each Party shall ensure, that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative
rulings of general application respecting any matter covered by this Agreement are
promptly published, wherever possible electronically, including on the internet if
feasible, or otherwise made available in such a manner as to enable interested persons
and the other Party to become acquainted with them.

2. Subject to its laws and regulations, each Party shall:

(a) publish in advance any such measure referred to in paragraph 1 that it
proposes to adopt; and

(b) provide interested persons and the other Party a reasonable opportunity to
comment on such proposed measures.

120

Article 10.4: Provision of Information

1. If a Party considers that any proposed or actual measure may materially affect
the operation of this Agreement or otherwise substantially affect the other Party’s
interests under this Agreement, it shall, to the extent possible and subject to its laws and
regulations, inform the other Party of the proposed or actual measure.

2. On request of a Party, the other Party shall provide information and respond to
questions pertaining to any proposed or actual measure referred to in paragraph | that
the requesting Party considers may materially affect the operation of this Agreement,
regardless whether or not the requesting Party has been previously informed of that
measure.

3. A Party may convey any request or provide information under this Article to the
other Party through their contact points.

4. Any information provided under this Article shall be without prejudice as to
whether the measure in question is consistent with this Agreement.

Article 10.5: Administrative Proceedings

With a view to administering its measures referred to in Article 10.3, in a
consistent, impartial and reasonable manner, each Party shall ensure that in its
administrative proceedings in which these measures are applied to particular persons or
goods of the other Party in specific cases that it:

(a) provides, wherever possible, reasonable notice, in accordance with its
domestic procedures, to persons of the other Party that are directly
affected by a proceeding, when a proceeding is initiated, including a
description of the nature of the proceeding, a statement of the legal
authority under which the proceeding is initiated, and a general
description of any issues in question;

(b) affords such persons a reasonable opportunity to present facts and
arguments in support of their positions prior to any final administrative
action, when the nature of the proceeding, the public interest and time
permit; and

(c) follows its procedures in accordance with its laws and regulations.

121

Article 10.6: Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial, or administrative
tribunals or procedures for the purpose of the prompt review and, if warranted,
correction of final administrative actions regarding matters covered by this Agreement.
Such tribunals shall be impartial and independent of the office or authority entrusted
with administrative enforcement and shall not have any substantial interest in the
outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, in any such tribunals or procedures, the parties to
the proceeding are provided with the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions;
and

(b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record or, if
required by its laws and regulations, the record compiled by the
administrative authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided in its
laws and regulations, that such decisions shall be implemented by, and shall govern the
practice of, the office or authority with respect to the administrative action that is the
subject of the decision.

122

CHAPTER 11

ADMINISTRATION

Article 11.1: IC-CEPA Joint Commission

1. The Parties hereby establish the IC-CEPA Joint Commission (Commission).

2. The Commission shall comprise relevant government officials of each Party and
be co-chaired by:

(a)

(b)

for Chile, the Director-General of International Economic Affairs of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Chile or its designee; and

for Indonesia, the Director-General of International Trade Negotiations
of the Ministry of Trade of Indonesia or its designee,

or their respective successors.

3. The Commission shall:

(a)

consider any matter relating to the implementation or operation of this
Agreement;

(b) review, consider and, as appropriate, decide on specific matters related to
the operation or implementation of this Agreement, including matters
reported by committees established under this Agreement;

(c) review this Agreement, in accordance with Article 14.5 (General Review
of the Agreement);

(d) supervise and coordinate the work of committees established under this
Agreement; and

(e) take such other actions as the Parties may agree.

4. The Commission may’:
(a) establish any committee or sub-committee, as the Commission deems

6

appropriate for the implementation or operation of this Agreement;

Chile shall implement any matter or action adopted by the Commission through acuerdos de

ejecucion (executive agreements), in accordance with article 54 N°1, paragraph 4 of the Constitucion
Politica de la Republica de Chile (Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile).

124

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

refer matters and delegate responsibilities to any committee or sub-
committee;

consider and adopt any matter relating to:

(1) the Schedules attached to Annex 3-A (Elimination of Customs
Duties); and

(ii) — the rules of origin established in Annex 4-A (Product Specific
Rules);

add or remove, on request of a Party, geographical indications listed
under Annex 3.10-A (Chile’s Geographical Indications and Appellations
of Origin) and Annex 3.10-B (Indonesia’s Geographical Indications and
Appellations of Origin);

as appropriate, issue interpretations of the provisions of this Agreement,
which shall be agreed in writing; and

seek the advice of any person or group as the Commission deems
appropriate on matters covered by this Agreement.

Article 11.2: Procedures of the Commission

1. The Commission shall convene at least once a year in regular session. The
Commission shall meet alternately in the territory of each Party, unless the Parties agree

otherwise.

2. The Commission shall also meet in special session within 30 days of the request
of a Party, with such sessions to be held in the territory of the other Party or at such
location as may be agreed by the Parties.

3. All decisions of the Commission shall be taken by mutual agreement.

4. The Commission shall establish its rules and procedures.

125

CHAPTER 12

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Article 12.1: Scope

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply with
respect to the avoidance or settlement of disputes between the Parties concerning the
implementation, interpretation or application of this Agreement, which includes

wherever a Party considers that:

(a) a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with its obligations under this
Agreement; or

(b) the other Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under this
Agreement.
Article 12.2: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the
context provides otherwise:

Complaining Party means a Party that requests the establishment of an arbitral panel
under Article 12.7;

Consulting Party means a Party that requests consultations under Article 12.5;

perishable goods mean goods that rapidly decay due to their natural characteristics, in
particular in the absence of appropriate storage conditions; and

Responding Party means a Party that has been complained against under Article 12.7.

Article 12.3: General Provisions

1. A panel established under this Chapter shall interpret this Agreement in
accordance with the customary rules of treaty interpretation of public international law.
With respect to any provision of the WTO Agreement that has been incorporated into
this Agreement, the panel shall also consider relevant interpretations in reports of WTO
panels and the Appellate Body adopted by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body.

2. All notifications, requests and replies made pursuant to this Chapter shall be in
writing.

126

3. The Parties are encouraged at every stage of a dispute to make every effort to
reach a mutually agreed solution to the dispute.

4. Any timeframe provided for in this Chapter may be modified by agreement
between the Parties.

Article 12.4: Choice of Forum

1. If a dispute regarding any matter arises under this Agreement and under another
international trade agreement to which the Parties are party or the WTO Agreement, the
Complaining Party may select the dispute settlement procedure in which to settle the
dispute.

2. Once the Complaining Party has requested a panel under an agreement referred
to in paragraph 1, the forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of the others.

3. For the purposes of this Article, the Complaining Party shall be deemed to have
selected a forum in which to settle the dispute when it has requested the establishment
of an arbitral panel pursuant to Article 12.7 or requested the establishment of, or
referred a matter to, a similar dispute settlement panel or arbitral tribunal under another
international trade agreement.

Article 12.5: Consultations

1. The Consulting Party may request in writing consultations to the other Party
with respect to any matter described in Article 12.1, including any matter relating to a
measure that the other Party proposes to take (proposed measure).’ The other Party shall
accord due consideration to a request of consultation made by the Consulting Party and
shall accord adequate opportunity for such consultations.

2. The Consulting Party shall deliver the request to the other Party, setting out the
reasons for the request, including identification of the measure at issue and an indication
of the legal basis for the complaint, and providing sufficient information to enable an
examination of the matter.

3. The Parties shall make every effort to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution
of the matter through consultations under this Article.

; For greater certainty, the establishment of an arbitral panel shall not be requested on any matter

relating to a proposed measure.

127

4. In consultations under this Article, a Party may request the other Party to make
available personnel of its government agencies or other regulatory bodies who have
expertise in the matter subject to consultations.

5. The consultations under this Article shall be confidential and without prejudice
to the rights of either Party in any further proceedings.

Article 12.6: Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation

1. The Parties may at any time agree to voluntarily undertake an alternative method
of dispute resolution, such as good offices, conciliation or mediation. Procedures for
such alternative methods of dispute resolution may begin at any time and may be
terminated at any time by either Party.

2. If the Parties agree, such procedures referred to in paragraph | may continue
while the matter is being examined by a panel established or reconvened under this
Chapter.

3. Proceedings involving such procedures referred to in paragraph 1, and positions
taken by the Parties during these proceedings, shall be confidential and without
prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further or other proceedings.

Article 12.7: Establishment of Arbitral Panels

1. The Complaining Party that requested consultations under Article 12.5 may
request in writing the establishment of an arbitral panel, if the Parties fail to resolve the

matter within:

(a) 60 days after the date of receipt of the request for consultations under
Article 12.5.1; or

(b) 30 days after the date of receipt of the request for consultations under
Article 12.5.1 in cases of urgency, including those which concern

perishable goods.

2. The establishment of an arbitral panel shall not be requested on any matter
relating to a proposed measure.

3. Any request to establish an arbitral panel pursuant to this Article shall identify:

(a) the specific measure at issue;

128

(b) the legal basis of the complaint, including any provision of this
Agreement alleged to have been breached and any other relevant
provision; and

(c) the factual basis for the complaint.

4. The arbitral panel shall be established and perform its functions in a manner
consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.

5. The date of the establishment of an arbitral panel shall be the date on which the
chair is appointed.

Article 12.8: Terms of Reference of Arbitral Panels

Unless the Parties agree otherwise within 20 days from the date of receipt of the
request for the establishment of the arbitral panel, the terms of reference of the arbitral
panel shall be:

“To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the matter
referred to in the request for the establishment of an arbitral panel pursuant to Article
12.7, to make findings of law and fact and determinations on whether the measure is not
in conformity with the Agreement together with the reasons therefore, and to issue a
written report for the resolution of the dispute. The arbitral panel may make
recommendations for resolution of the dispute, subject to the agreement between the
Parties.”

Article 12.9: Composition of Arbitral Panels

1. An arbitral panel shall comprise three panellists. All appointments and
nominations of panellists under this Article shall conform fully with the requirements in
paragraphs 5 and 6.

2. Each Party shall, within 30 days after the date of receipt of the request for the
establishment of an arbitral panel, appoint one panellist who may be its national and
propose up to three candidates to serve as the third panellist who shall be the chair of
the arbitral panel. The third panellist shall not be a national of either Party, nor have his
or her usual place of residence in either Party, nor be employed by either Party, nor have
dealt with the dispute in any capacity.

3. The Parties shall agree on and appoint the third panellist within 45 days after the

date of receipt of the request for the establishment of an arbitral panel, taking into
account the candidates proposed pursuant to paragraph 2.

129

4. If a Party has not appointed a panellist pursuant to paragraph 2 or if the Parties
fail to agree on and appoint the third panellist pursuant to paragraph 3, the panellist or
panellists not yet appointed shall be chosen within seven days by lot from the candidates
proposed pursuant to paragraph 2.

5. All panellists shall:

(a) have expertise or experience in law, international trade or other matters
covered by this Agreement;

(b) be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity, reliability and sound
judgment;

(c) be independent of, and not be affiliated with or receive instructions from,
the government of either Party; and

(d) comply with a code of conduct, to be provided in the Rules of Procedure
referred to in Article 12.17.

6 Panellists shall serve in their individual capacities and not as government
representatives, nor as representatives of any organisation. The Parties shall not give
them instructions nor seek to influence them as individuals with regard to matters before
an arbitral panel.

7. If a panellist appointed under this Article is incapacitated, becomes unable to act
or resigns, a successor shall be appointed within 15 days in accordance with the
appointment procedure provided for in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, which shall be applied,
respectively, mutatis mutandis. The successor shall have all the powers and duties of the
original panellist. The work of the arbitral panel shall be suspended for a period
beginning on the date the original panellist is incapacitated, becomes unable to act or
resigns. The work of the arbitral panel shall resume on the date the successor is
appointed.

Article 12.10: Functions of Panels

1. The arbitral panels shall make an objective assessment of the matter before it,
including an objective assessment of:

(a) the facts of the case;

(b) the applicability of and conformity with the provisions of this Agreement
that are relevant to the matter before the panel;

(c) whether the measure of the Responding Party is inconsistent with its
obligations under this Agreement; and

130

(d) whether the Responding Party has otherwise failed to carry out its
obligations under this Agreement.

2. The arbitral panel shall make the findings, determinations, and, if applicable,
recommendations as referred to in the Terms of Reference and necessary for the
resolution of the dispute.

3. The arbitral panel shall make the findings, determinations, and, when applicable,
recommendations, in accordance with this Agreement.

4. The arbitral panel shall make its findings, determinations, and, when applicable,
recommendations, including its report, by consensus. If a panel is unable to reach
consensus, it may make its findings, determinations, and, when applicable,
recommendations, including its report, by majority vote.

Article 12.11: Proceedings of Arbitral Panels

1. The arbitral panels shall meet in closed session. The meetings of the arbitral
panels with the Parties shall be closed to the public, unless the Parties agree otherwise.
The arbitral panels shall hold their hearings in closed session, unless the Parties agree
otherwise.

2. The arbitral panels established under this Chapter shall, after consulting the
Parties, set out their respective timeframes, including precise deadlines for submissions
by the Parties, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure referred to in Article 12.17.

3. The Parties shall have the opportunity to provide at least one written submission
to set out the facts, arguments and counter-arguments, and to attend any of the
presentations, statements or rebuttals in the proceedings. All information or written
submissions submitted by a Party to the arbitral panels, including any comments on the
draft report and responses to questions put by the arbitral panels, shall be made
available to the other Party.

4. The arbitral panels should consult with the Parties as appropriate and provide
adequate opportunities for the development of a mutually satisfactory resolution.

5. After notifying the Parties, and subject to such terms and conditions as the
Parties may agree, if any, within 10 days, the arbitral panels may seek information from
any relevant source and may consult experts to obtain their opinion or advice on certain
aspects of the matter. The arbitral panels shall provide the Parties with a copy of any
advice or opinion obtained and an opportunity to provide comments.

6. The deliberations of the arbitral panels and the documents submitted to them
shall be kept confidential. The Parties shall be present only when invited by the arbitral

131

panels to appear before them. There shall be no ex parte communications with the
arbitral panels concerning matters under consideration by them.

7. Notwithstanding paragraph 6, either Party may make public statements as to its
views regarding the dispute, but shall treat as confidential, the information and written
submissions submitted by the other Party to the arbitral panel which that other Party has
designated as confidential. If a Party has provided information or written submissions
designated to be confidential, that Party shall, within 28 days of a request of the other
Party, provide a non-confidential summary of the information or written submissions
which may be disclosed publicly.

8. Each Party shall bear the cost of its appointed panellist at its own expenses. The
cost of the chair of an arbitral panel and other expenses associated with the conduct of
the proceedings shall be borne by the Parties in equal shares.

9. Before the arbitral panel presents its final report, if the Parties agree, the arbitral
panel may at any stage of the proceedings propose the Parties that the dispute be settled
amicably.

Article 12.12: Suspension or Termination of Proceedings

1. The Parties may agree that the arbitral panel suspend its work at any time for a
period not exceeding 12 consecutive months from the date of such agreement. In the
event of such a suspension, the timeframes set out in paragraphs 2 and 6 of Article
12.13 and paragraph 7 of Article 12.16 shall be extended by the amount of time that the
work was suspended. If the work of the arbitral panel has been suspended for more than
12 consecutive months, the authority for establishment of the arbitral panel shall lapse
unless the Parties agree otherwise.

2. The Parties may agree to terminate the proceedings of the arbitral panel by
jointly notifying the chair of the arbitral panel at any time before the issuance of the
report to the Parties.

Article 12.13: Report

1. The draft and final reports of the arbitral panel shall be drafted without the
presence of the Parties. The arbitral panel shall base its reports on the relevant
provisions of this Agreement and the submissions and arguments of the Parties, and
may take into account any other relevant information provided to it.

2. The arbitral panel shall, within 180 days, or within 60 days in cases of urgency,
including those which concern perishable goods, after the date of its establishment,
submit to the Parties its draft report. The arbitral panel shall provide the draft report no
later than 30 days before the deadline for completion of the final report. The arbitral

132

panel shall accord adequate opportunity to the Parties to review the entirety of the draft
report and shall include a discussion of any comments made by the Parties in the final
report.

3. The panel shall set out in the draft and final reports:
(a) a descriptive section summarising the arguments of the Parties;

(b) — its findings on the facts of the case and on the applicability of the
provisions of this Agreement;

(c) any other finding that the arbitral panel considers relevant to the matter;

(d) its determination on whether the measure is not in conformity with this
Agreement;

(e) if agreed by the Parties, its recommendations for the resolution of the
dispute; and

(f) its reasons for its findings and determination in subparagraphs (b), (c),
(d), and, if applicable, (e).

4. When the arbitral panel considers that it cannot submit the draft report within the
timeframe provided for under paragraph 2, it may extend that timeframe with the
consent of the Parties.

5. After considering any written comments on the draft report, the arbitral panel
may reconsider the draft report and make any further assessment it considers
appropriate.

6. The arbitral panel shall submit the final report to the Parties no later than 30
days after the date of submission of the draft report. Opinions expressed in the reports
by the panellists shall be anonymous. Subject to the agreement between the Parties, the
reports shall include any separate opinions on matters not unanimously agreed, not
disclosing which panellists are associated with majority or minority opinions.

7. The findings, determinations and, if applicable, any recommendations of the
arbitral panel cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations of the Parties

provided in this Agreement.

8. The final report shall be available to the public within 30 days of the date of
issuance, subject to the requirement to protect confidential information.

9. The final report shall be final and binding on the Parties.

133

Article 12.14: Implementation of the Report

1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Responding Party shall eliminate the
non-conformity with this Agreement, as determined in the final report, immediately, or
if this is not practicable, within a reasonable period of time.

2. If a reasonable period of time is required, it shall, whenever possible, be agreed
between the Parties. If the Parties are unable to agree on the reasonable period of time
within 45 days of the date of issuance of the final report to the Parties, either Party may
request an arbitral panel as provided for in Article 12.16.7 to determine the reasonable
period of time. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, such request shall be made no later
than 120 days after the date of the issuance of the final report.

3. Any other detailed provision on this Article shall be provided for under the
Rules of Procedure referred to in Article 12.17.

Article 12.15: Compliance Review

If there is disagreement between the Parties as to whether the Responding Party
eliminated the non-conformity with this Agreement as determined in the final report,
within the reasonable period of time pursuant to Article 12.14, either Party may refer the
matter to an arbitral panel® as provided for in Article 12.16.7. Any detailed provisions
related to the compliance review arbitral panel shall be provided under the Rules of
Procedure referred to in Article 12.17.

Article 12.16: Non-Implementation -— Compensation and Suspension of
Concessions or other Obligations

1. If the Responding Party notifies the Complaining Party that it 1s impracticable,
or the arbitral panel to which the matter is referred pursuant to Article 12.15 confirms
that the Responding Party failed to eliminate the non-conformity with this Agreement as
determined in the final report within the reasonable period of time as determined
pursuant to Article 12.14.2, the Responding Party shall, if so requested, enter into
negotiations with the Complaining Party with a view to reach a mutually acceptable
compensation.

2. If there is no agreement on acceptable compensation within 30 days of the date
of receipt of the request mentioned in paragraph 1, the Complaining Party may suspend
the application of concessions or other obligations under this Agreement to the
Responding Party, after giving notification of such suspension 30 days in advance. Such

Consultations under Article 12.5 are not required for these procedures.

134

notification may only be given 20 days after the date of receipt of the request mentioned
in paragraph 1.

3. The compensation referred to in paragraph | and the suspension referred to in
paragraph 2 shall be temporary measures. Neither compensation nor suspension is
preferred to full elimination of the non-conformity with this Agreement as determined
in the final report. The suspension shall only be applied until such time as the non-
conformity is fully eliminated, or a mutually satisfactory solution is reached.

4. In considering what concessions or other obligations to suspend pursuant to
paragraph 2:

(a) the Complaining Party should first seek to suspend concessions or other
obligations with respect to the same sector(s) as that in which the final
report referred to in Article 12.13 has found a failure to comply with the
obligations under this Agreement; and

(b) if the Complaining Party considers that it 1s not practicable or effective to
suspend concessions or other obligations with respect to the same
sector(s), it may suspend concessions or other obligations with respect to
other sectors. The notification of such suspension pursuant to paragraph 2
shall indicate the reasons on which it is based.

5. The level of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall be equivalent to the level
of the nullification or impairment.

6. If the Responding Party considers that the requirements for the suspension of
concessions or other obligations by the Complaining Party set out in paragraphs 2, 3, 4
or 5 have not been met, it may refer the matter to an arbitral panel.

7. The arbitral panel that is established for the purposes of this Article or Article
12.14 shall have, wherever possible, as its panellists, the panellists of the original
arbitral panel. If this is not possible, then the panellists to the arbitral panel that is
established for the purposes of this Article or Article 12.14 shall be appointed pursuant
to Article 12.9. The arbitral panel established under this Article or Article 12.14 shall
issue its report within 60 days of the date when the matter is referred to it. When the
arbitral panel considers that it cannot issue its report within the aforementioned 60 days
period, it may extend that period for a maximum of 30 days with the consent of the
Parties. The report shall be available to the public within 15 days of the date of issuance,
subject to the requirement to protect confidential information. The report shall be final
and binding on the Parties.

135

Article 12.17: Rules of Procedure

The Commission shall adopt the Rules of Procedure which provide for the
details of the rules and procedures of the arbitral panels established under this Chapter,
upon the entry into force of this Agreement. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the
arbitral panel shall follow the Rules of Procedure adopted by the Commission and may,
after consulting the Parties, adopt additional rules of procedure not inconsistent with the
Rules of Procedure adopted by the Commission.

Article 12.18: Application and Modification of Rules and Procedures
Any timeframe or other rules and procedures for the arbitral panels in
accordance with this Chapter, including the Rules of Procedure referred to in Article

12.17, may be modified by mutual consent of the Parties. The Parties may also agree at
any time not to apply any provision of this Chapter.

136

CHAPTER 13

EXCEPTIONS

Article 13.1: General Exceptions

1. For the purposes of Chapter 3 (Trade in Goods), Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin),
Chapter 5 (Customs Procedures and Cooperation), Chapter 6 (Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures) and Chapter 7 (Technical Barriers to Trade), Article XX of
GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in
Article XX(b) of GATT 1994 include environmental measures necessary to protect
human, animal, or plant life or health, and that Article XX(g) of GATT 1994 applies to
measures relating to the conservation of living and non-living exhaustible natural
resources.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from taking
action authorised by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body. A Party taking such action
shall inform the Commission to the fullest extent possible of measures taken and of their
termination.

Article 13.2: Security Exceptions

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a) to require a Party to furnish any information the disclosure of which it
considers contrary to its essential security interests;

(b) — to prevent a Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for
the protection of its essential security interests:

(1) relating to fissionable materials or the materials from which they
are derived;

(11) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war
and to such traffic in other goods and materials, or relating to the
supply of services, as carried on directly or indirectly for the
purpose of supplying or provisioning a military establishment; or

(111) | taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations;
or

137

(c) to prevent a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations
under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

2. A Party taking action under paragraphs 1(b) and (c) shall inform the
Commission to the fullest extent possible of measures taken and of their termination.
Article 13.3: Taxation Measures

1. For the purposes of this Article:

designated authorities means:

(a) in the case of Chile, the Minister of Finance (Ministro de Hacienda) or
an authorised representative of the Minister;

(b) in the case of Indonesia, the Minister of Finance or his or her authorised
representative;

tax convention means a convention for the avoidance of double taxation or other
international taxation agreement or arrangement to which the Parties are party; and

taxes and taxation measures include excise duties, but do not include:

(a) a customs duty as defined in Article 2.1 (Definitions of General
Application), or

(b) the measures listed in exceptions (b) and (c) of that definition.

2. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to
taxation measures.

3. The provisions of this Agreement shall apply to taxation measures only to the
same extent as does Article HI of the GATT 1994.

4. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of any Party
under any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement
and any such tax convention that convention shall prevail to the extent of the
inconsistency.

5. In the case of a tax convention between the Parties, if an issue arises as to
whether any inconsistency exists between this Agreement and the tax convention, the
issue shall be referred to the designated authorities of this Article. Those designated
authorities shall determine the existence and the extent of such inconsistency. A
determination made under this paragraph by the designated authorities shall be binding.

138

Article 13.4: Balance-of-Payments Measures on Trade in Goods

1. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the imposition of restrictive measures for
balance-of-payments purposes.

2. Any measure taken for balance-of-payments purposes shall be in accordance
with that Party’s rights and obligations under GATT 1994, including the Understanding
on the Balance-of-Payments Provisions of GATT 1994. A Party shall publish or notify
to the other Party of any restrictive measures adopted or maintained, or any changes
therein, to the extent that it does not duplicate the process under the WTO and the
International Monetary Fund.

3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be regarded as altering the rights enjoyed and
obligations undertaken by a Party as a party to the Articles of the Agreement of the
International Monetary Fund, as may be amended.

Article 13.5: Disclosure of Information

1. Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations, maintain the
confidentiality of information provided in confidence by the other Party pursuant to this
Agreement.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as requiring a Party to furnish or
allow access to confidential information the disclosure of which would impede law
enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or which would prejudice the
legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.

139

CHAPTER 14

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 14.1: Annexes and Footnotes

The Annexes and footnotes to this Agreement shall constitute an integral part of
this Agreement.
Article 14.2: Amendments
1. The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement.
2. Such amendment shall constitute an integral part of this Agreement and shall
enter into force 60 days after the date of the last written notification of the completion of
domestic legal procedures or such other period as the Parties may agree.
Article 14.3: Amendment of the WTO Agreement

Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, if any provision of the WTO
Agreement that the Parties have referred to or incorporated into this Agreement is
amended, the Parties shall consult on whether to amend this Agreement.
Article 14.4: Entry into Force and Termination
1. This Agreement shall enter into force 60 days after the date of exchange of
instruments of ratification by the Parties, subject to the completion of the necessary
domestic legal procedures of each Party. It shall remain in force unless terminated as
provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article.
2. Either Party may terminate this Agreement by written notification to the other
Party. This Agreement shall expire 180 days after the date of such notification.
Article 14.5: General Review of the Agreement

The Parties shall undertake a general review of this Agreement in the third year

following the date of entry into force of this Agreement and every three years thereafter,
unless agreed otherwise by the Parties.

140

Article 14.6: Future Work Program

1. Unless agreed otherwise by the Parties, they shall negotiate trade in services and
investment after the entry into force of this Agreement.

2. The result of the negotiations referred to in paragraph 1 shall form an integral
part of this Agreement.
Article 14.7: Authentic Texts

This Agreement is done in duplicate in the Spanish, Indonesian, and English

languages. All texts of this Agreement shall be equally authentic. In the event of any
divergence between those texts, the English text shall prevail.