STRENGTHEN the bonds of friendship and cooperation between them and their
peoples;

BUILD on their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade organisation, done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994, and
other multilateral and bilateral instruments of cooperation;

FACILITATE trade in goods and services between the Parties by enhancing
transparency, and promoting good regulatory practices;

RECOGNISE that the provisions of this Agreement preserve the right of the Parties to
regulate within their territories to achieve legitimate public policy objectives;

PROTECT human, animal, or plant life or health in the territories of the Parties and
advance science-based decision making while facilitating trade between them;

PROMOTE transparency, good governance and the rule of law, and prevent and combat
bribery and corruption in trade and investment;

ENHANCE conditions of fair competition in the territory of the Parties;

ENCOURAGE enterprises operating within their territory or subject to their jurisdiction
to respect internationally recognised responsible business conduct principles and
standards;

PROMOTE, PROTECT and ENFORCE labour rights, the improvement of working
conditions, and the strengthening of cooperation on labour issues;

PROMOTE high levels of environmental protection, including through effective
enforcement of environmental laws and environmental cooperation;

ADVANCE the objective of sustainable development in its economic, social and
environmental dimensions through enhanced bilateral relations;

SUPPORT the growth and development of small and medium-sized enterprises by
enhancing their ability to fully participate in and benefit from the opportunities created by
this Agreement;

RECOGNISE that small and medium-sized enterprises, including micro enterprises and
entrepreneurs contribute significantly to economic prosperity, employment, community
development, youth engagement and innovation, as well as making progress in achieving
the UN Sustainable Development Goals;

REAFFIRM their commitments as parties to the UNESCO Convention on the Protection
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, done at Paris on

20 October 2005, and recognise that states must maintain the ability to preserve, develop,
and implement their cultural policies;

ESTABLISH a predictable legal and commercial framework that supports increased
trade and investment through their Comprehensive Economic Partnership;

HAVE AGREED as follows:

CHAPTER 1

INITIAL PROVISIONS AND GENERAL DEFINITIONS

Section A: Initial Provisions

Article 1.1: Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties, consistent with Article XXIV of GATT 1994 and Article V of GATS,
hereby establish the Canada-Indonesia Comprehensive Economic Partnership as a free
trade area.

Article 1.2: Relation to Other Agreements

1. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other
under the WTO Agreement and other agreements to which the Parties are party.

2. If a Party considers that a provision of this Agreement is inconsistent with a
provision of another agreement referred to in paragraph 1, the Parties shall, on request,
consult with each other to reach a mutually satisfactory outcome. This paragraph is

without prejudice to a Party’s rights and obligations under Chapter 24 (Dispute
Settlement).

Article 1.3: Extent of Obligations
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party is fully responsible
for the observance of all provisions of this Agreement and shall take reasonable measures

as may be available to it to ensure observance of the provisions of this Agreement by
governments other than at the central level and authorities within its territory.

Article 1.4: Delegated Authority
Each Party shall ensure that any person that has been delegated regulatory,

administrative, or other governmental authority by a Party act in accordance with the
Party’s obligations as set out under this Agreement in the exercise of that authority.

Section B: General Definitions

Article 1.5: General Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:

AD Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

1-1

central government means:

(a) for Canada, the Government of Canada;

(b) for Indonesia, the Government of the Republic of Indonesia;
covered investment means, with respect to a Party, an investment:

(a) in its territory;

(b) made in accordance with the applicable domestic law of the Party at the
time the investment is made;!

(c) directly or indirectly owned or controlled by an investor of the other Party;
and

(d) existing on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or made or
acquired thereafter;

customs administration means the governmental authority that is responsible under the
law of a Party for the administration of customs laws and regulations or any successor of
such customs administration;

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A of the WTO
Agreement;

days means calendar days, including weekends and holidays;

enterprise means any entity constituted or organised under applicable law, whether or
not for profit, and whether privately or governmentally owned or controlled, including
any corporation, trust, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, association, or
similar organisation;

existing means in effect on the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

GATS means the General Agreement on Trade in Services Annex 1B of the WTO
Agreement;

GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A of
the WTO Agreement;

goods means any merchandise, product, article, or material;

Harmonised System (HS) means the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding
System, including its General Rules of Interpretation, Section Notes, Chapter Notes, and
Subheading Notes as set out in the Annex to the International Convention on the
Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System, done at Brussels

on 14 June 1983, as may be amended, and as adopted and implemented by the Parties in
their respective laws;

heading means the first four digits in the tariff classification number under the
Harmonised System;

measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,
procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other form;

' An investment is not a covered investment if it has been established through illegal conduct including fraudulent
misrepresentation, concealment, or corruption. For greater certainty, illegal conduct does not include minor or technical
breaches of domestic law.

1-2

national means a natural person who is:
(a) for Canada, a Canadian citizen or permanent resident under Canadian law;

(b) for Indonesia, an Indonesian national as defined in Law No. 12/2006, as
amended, or any successor legislation;

perishable goods means goods that rapidly decay due to their natural characteristics, in
particular in the absence of appropriate storage conditions;

person means a natural person or an enterprise;
person of a Party means a national of a Party or an enterprise of a Party;

preferential tariff treatment means the customs duty rate applicable to an originating
good under this Agreement;

regional government means:
(a) for Canada, a province or territory of Canada;
(b) for Indonesia, a province of Indonesia, as defined under Indonesian law;

Safeguards Agreement means the Agreement on Safeguards in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement;

sanitary or phytosanitary measure means a measure referred to in paragraph | of
Annex A to the SPS Agreement;

SCM Agreement means the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures in
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

state enterprise means an enterprise that is owned, or controlled through ownership
interests, by a Party;

subheading means the first six digits in the tariff classification number under the
Harmonised System;

territory means:
(a) with respect to Canada,

(1) the land territory, air space, internal waters, and territorial sea of
Canada,

(11) the exclusive economic zone of Canada, and
(111) — the continental shelf of Canada,

as determined by its domestic law and consistent with international law;

(b) with respect to Indonesia, the land territories, internal waters, archipelagic
waters, territorial sea, including the seabed and subsoil thereof, and
airspace over such territories and waters, as well as the contiguous zone,
the continental shelf and exclusive economic zone, over which Indonesia
has sovereignty, sovereign rights or jurisdiction as defined in its laws, and
in accordance with international law, including the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, done at Montego Bay on 10 December
1982;

TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement;

WTO means the World Trade organisation; and

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
organisation, done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994.

1-4

CHAPTER 2

NATIONAL TREATMENT AND MARKET ACCESS FOR GOODS

Article 2.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

Agreement on Agriculture means the Agreement on Agriculture, contained in
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

agricultural good means a product listed in Annex | to the Agreement on Agriculture;

consular transactions means requirements that goods of a Party intended for export to
the territory of the other Party must first be submitted to the supervision of the consul of
the importing Party in the territory of the exporting Party for the purpose of obtaining
consular invoices or consular visas for commercial invoices, certificates of origin,
manifests, shippers’ export declarations, or any other customs documentation required on
or in connection with importation;

customs duty means a duty or a charge of any kind imposed on or in connection with the
importation of a good, including a form of surtax or surcharge imposed on or in
connection with that importation, but does not include:

(a) a charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with
Article III:2 of the GATT 1994;

(b) an anti-dumping or countervailing duty;

(c) a fee or other charge imposed in connection with the importation
commensurate with the cost of services rendered; and

(d) a payment or a security offered or collected related to an imported good
arising out of any tendering system in respect of the administration of
quantitative import restrictions or tariff rate quotas;

duty-free means free of customs duty;

export licensing procedure means a requirement that a Party adopts or maintains under
which an exporter must, as a condition for exporting a good from the Party’s territory,
submit an application or other documentation to an administrative body or bodies, but
does not include customs documentation required in the normal course of trade or any
requirement that must be fulfilled prior to introduction of the good into commerce within
the Party’s territory;

export subsidy means an export subsidy as defined in Article 1(e) of the Agreement on
Agriculture;

goods of a Party means domestic products as these are understood in the GATT 1994 or
such goods as the Parties may agree, and includes originating goods of a Party;

import licensing means an administrative procedure requiring the submission of an
application or other documentation (other than that generally required for customs
clearance purposes) to the relevant administrative body as a prior condition for
importation into the territory of the importing Party;

Import Licensing Agreement means the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures,
contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

low level presence (LLP) occurrence means the inadvertent low level presence in a
shipment of plants or plant products, except for a plant or plant product that is a
medicine or medical product, of rDNA plant material that is authorised for use in at
least one country, but not in the importing country, and if authorised for food use, a
food safety assessment has been done based on the Codex Guideline for the Conduct
of a Food Safety Assessment of Foods Derived from Recombinant-DNA Plants
(CAG/GL 45-2003).

modern biotechnology means the application of:

(a) in vitro nucleic acid techniques, including recombinant DNA and direct
injection of nucleic acid into cells or organelles; or

(b) fusion of cells beyond the taxonomic family,

that overcome natural physiological reproductive or recombination barriers and that are
not techniques used in traditional breeding and selection;

product of modern biotechnology means an agricultural good, or a fish or fish product
covered by Chapter 3 of the Harmonised System (HS) intended for food and feed,
developed using modern biotechnology, but does not include a medicine or a medical
product.

Article 2.2: Scope

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter applies to trade in
goods between the Parties.

Article 2.3: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in
accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, and to
this end, Article III of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into
and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. For greater certainty, the treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraph 1
means, with respect to a regional level of government, treatment no less favourable than
the most favourable treatment that the regional level of government accords to any like,
directly competitive or substitutable goods, as the case may be, of the Party of which it
forms a part.

3. This Article does not apply to a measure, including a measure’s continuation,
prompt renewal or amendment, in respect of excise duties on absolute alcohol, as listed
under tariff item 2207.10.90 in each Party’s Schedule of Concessions annexed to the
GATT 1994 and the internal sale and distribution of wine and distilled spirits.

2-2

Article 2.4: Elimination of Customs Duties on Imports

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, a Party shall not increase any
existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty, on an originating good.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall eliminate its
customs duties on originating goods in accordance with its Schedule to Annex 2-A
(Tariff Commitments).

3. On the request of a Party, the Parties shall consult to consider accelerating or
broadening the scope of the elimination of customs duties set out in their Schedules to
Annex 2-A (Tariff Commitments). An agreement between the Parties to accelerate or
broaden the scope of the elimination of a customs duty on an originating good shall
supersede any customs duty rate or staging category determined pursuant to each Party’s
Schedule to Annex 2-A (Tariff Commitments) for that good in accordance with and upon
completion of each Party's applicable legal procedures.

4. A Party may at any time unilaterally accelerate or broaden the scope of the
elimination of customs duties set out in its Schedule to Annex 2-A (Tariff Commitments)
on originating goods of the other Party. A Party shall inform the other Party as early as
practicable before the new rate of customs duties takes effect.

5. For greater certainty, a Party shall not prohibit an importer from claiming for an
originating good the rate of customs duty applied under the WTO Agreement.

6. For greater certainty, a Party may:

(a) modify its tariffs on goods for which no tariff preference is claimed under
this Agreement;

(b) increase a customs duty to the level established in its Schedule to
Annex 2-A (Tariff Commitments) after a unilateral reduction; or

(c) maintain or increase a customs duty as authorised by this Agreement, the
Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO, or an agreement under the WTO
Agreement.

Article 2.5: Classification of Goods and Transposition of Tariff Commitments

1. The classification of goods in trade between the Parties shall be in conformity
with the Harmonised System (HS) and its amendments.

2. At the request of a Party, the Parties shall share information on those tariff items
if any revisions are necessary, to ensure that each Party’s obligations under this
Agreement are not altered by its implementation of future amendments to the
Harmonised System (HS) into its national nomenclature.

3. At the request of a Party, the Committee on Trade in Goods may review the future
amendments to the Harmonised System (HS) to ensure that each Party’s obligations
under this Agreement are not altered, including by establishing, as needed, guidelines for
the transposition of Parties’ Schedules to Annex 2-A (Tariff Commitments) and consult
to resolve any differences that may arise between the Parties on matters related to the
Harmonised System (HS).

2-3

Article 2.6: Agricultural Special Safeguards

Originating agricultural goods traded under preferential tariff treatment shall not
be subject to any duties that the importing Party applies pursuant to a special safeguard it
takes pursuant to the Agreement on Agriculture. !

Article 2.7: Import and Export Restrictions

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, a Party shall not adopt or
maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any good of the other Party
or on the exportation or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of the other
Party, except in accordance with Article XI of the GATT 1994, including its
interpretative notes, and to this end, Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative
notes are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. The Parties understand that GATT 1994 rights and obligations incorporated by
paragraph 1 prohibit, in any circumstances in which any other form of restriction is
prohibited, a Party from adopting or maintaining:

(a) export or import price requirements, except as permitted in enforcement of
countervailing and antidumping duty orders or undertakings; or

(b) voluntary export restraints inconsistent with Article VI of the GATT 1994,
as implemented under Article 18 of the SCM Agreement and Article 8.1
of the AD Agreement.

3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, a Party shall not adopt or
maintain any measure prohibited by Article 4.2 of the Agreement on Agriculture with
respect to goods of the other Party. To this end, Article 4.2 of the Agreement on
Agriculture is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.”

4. If a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the importation from
or exportation to a non-Party of a good, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to
prevent that Party from:

(a) limiting or prohibiting the importation of the good of that non-Party from
the territory of the other Party; or

(b) requiring, as a condition for exporting the good of that Party to the
territory of the other Party, that the good not be re-exported to the
non-Party, directly or indirectly, without being consumed in the territory

of the other Party.
5. For the purposes of this Article, consumed means:
(a) actually consumed; or

' For greater certainty, an agricultural good for which most-favoured-nation tariff treatment applies may be subject to
additional duties applied by a Party pursuant to a special safeguard taken under the Agreement on Agriculture.

> For greater certainty, the Parties shared the understanding that Article 24.4.2 (Dispute Settlement — Choice of Forum)
includes any matter that has been subject to dispute settlement proceeding under WTO DSU.

2-4

(b) further processed or manufactured so as to result in a substantial change in
the value, form or use of the good, or in the production of another good.

6. If a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the importation of a
good from a non-Party, the Parties, on the request of a Party, shall consult with a view to
avoiding undue interference with or distortion of pricing, marketing or distribution
arrangements in the other Party.

7. This Article does not apply to a measure, including that measure’s continuation,
prompt renewal or amendment, in respect of the following:

(a) excise duties on absolute alcohol, as listed under tariff item 2207.10.90 in
a Party’s Schedule of Concessions annexed to the GATT 1994;

(b) the importation of goods of the prohibited provisions of tariff
items 9897.00.00, 9898.00.00, and 9899.00.00 referred to in the Schedule
of the Customs Tariff;

(c) the use of ships in the coasting trade of each Party’s own territory;
(d) the export of logs of all species; and

(e) the export of unprocessed fish pursuant to applicable provincial
legislation.

Article 2.8: Agricultural Export Subsidies

1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the Nairobi WTO Ministerial
Decision of 19 December 2015 on Export Competition.’

2. The Parties share the objective of the multilateral elimination of export subsidies
for agricultural goods and shall work together to prevent their reintroduction in any form.

3. A Party shall not adopt or maintain a measure on an agricultural good that is not
consistent with the Nairobi WTO Ministerial Decision of 19 December 2015 on Export
Competition.

Article 2.9: Transparency in Import Licensing Procedures

1. Each Party shall ensure that its import licensing procedures are implemented in a
transparent and predictable manner, and applied in accordance with the Import Licensing
Agreement.

2. Promptly after this Agreement enters into force, each Party shall notify the other
Party of its existing import licensing procedures, if any. The notification shall include the
information specified in Article 5.2 of the Import Licensing Agreement and any
information required under paragraph 6.

3 WTO Document WT/MIN(15)/45.

2-5

3. A Party shall be deemed to be in compliance with the obligations in paragraph 2
with respect to an existing import licensing procedure if:

(a) it has notified that procedure to the WTO Committee on Import Licensing
provided for in Article 4 of the Import Licensing Agreement together with
the information specified in Article 5.2 of that agreement;

(b) it has provided with respect to that procedure the information requested in
the annual questionnaire on import licensing procedures under Article 7.3
of the Import Licensing Agreement in its most recent annual submission to
the WTO Committee on Import Licensing due before the date of entry into
force of this Agreement for that Party; and

(c) it has included in either the notification described in subparagraph (a) or
the annual submission described in subparagraph (b) any information
required to be notified to the other Party under paragraph 6.

4. Each Party shall comply with Article 1.4(a) of the Import Licensing Agreement
with respect to any new or modified import licensing procedure. Each Party shall also
publish on an official government website any information that it is required to publish
under Article 1.4(a) of the Import Licensing Agreement.

5. Each Party shall notify the other Party of any new import licensing procedures it
adopts and any modifications it makes to its existing import licensing procedures, if
possible, no later than 60 days before the new procedure or modification takes effect. A
Party shall not provide the notification later than 60 days after the date of its publication.
The notification shall include any information required under paragraph 6. A Party shall
be deemed to be in compliance with this obligation, if it notifies a new import licensing
procedure or a modification to an existing import licensing procedure to the WTO
Committee on Import Licensing in accordance with Article 5.1, 5.2, or 5.3 of the Import
Licensing Agreement, and includes in its notification any information required to be
notified to the other Party under paragraph 6.

6. (a) A notice under paragraph 2, 3, or 5 shall state if, under any import
licensing procedure that is a subject of the notice:

(1) the terms of an import licence for any product limit the permissible
end users of the product; or

(11) the Party imposes any of the following conditions on eligibility for
obtaining a licence to import any product:

(A) | membership in an industry association;

(B) — approval by an industry association of the request for an
import licence;

(C) a history of importing the product or similar products;

(D) | minimum importer or end user production capacity;

2-6

(E) minimum importer or end user registered capital; or

(F) a contractual or other relationship between the importer and
a distributor in the Party’s territory.

(b) A notice under subparagraph (a), that states that there is a limitation on
permissible end users or a licence-eligibility condition shall:

(1) list all products for which the end-user limitation or
licence-eligibility condition applies; and

(11) describe the end-user limitation or licence-eligibility condition.

7. Each Party shall respond within 60 days to a reasonable enquiry from the other
Party concerning its licensing rules and its procedures for the submission of an
application for an import licence, including the eligibility of persons, firms, and
institutions to make an application, the administrative body or bodies to be approached
and the list of products subject to the licensing requirement.

8. If a Party denies an import licence application with respect to a good of the other
Party, it shall, on request of the applicant and within a reasonable period after receiving
the request, provide the applicant with a written explanation of the reason for the denial.

9. A Party shall not apply an import licensing procedure to a good of the other Party

unless it has, with respect to that procedure, met the requirements of paragraph 2 or 4, as
applicable.

Article 2.10: Transparency in Export Licensing Procedures

1. Within 30 days after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, each Party
shall notify the other Party in writing of the publications in which its export licensing
procedures, if any, are set out, including addresses of relevant government websites on
which the procedures are published. Thereafter, each Party shall publish any new export
licensing procedure, or any modification of an export licensing procedure it adopts, as
soon as practicable but no later than 60 days after the new procedure or modification
takes effect.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, the publications it notifies under paragraph 1
include:

(a) the texts of its export licensing procedures, including any modifications it
makes to those procedures;

(b) the goods subject to each licensing procedure;
(c) for each procedure, a description of:
(1) the process for applying for a licence; and

(11) any criteria an applicant must meet to be eligible to seek a licence;

2-7

(d) a contact point or points from which interested persons can obtain further
information on the conditions for obtaining an export licence;

(e) the administrative body or bodies to which an application or other relevant
documentation should be submitted;

(f) a description of or a citation to a publication reproducing in full any
measure or measures that the export licensing procedure implements;

(g) the period during which each export licensing procedure will be in effect,
unless the procedure will remain in effect until withdrawn or revised in a
new publication;

(h) if the Party intends to use a licensing procedure to administer an export
quota, the overall quantity and, if practicable, the value of the quota, and
the opening and closing dates of the quota; and

(i) any exemptions or exceptions available to the public that replace the
requirement to obtain an export licence, how to request or use these
exemptions or exceptions, and if applicable the criteria for them.

3. In accordance with its relevant laws and regulations, a Party shall provide the
other Party, on the other Party’s request and to the extent practicable, the following
information regarding a particular export licensing procedure that it adopts or maintains,
except if doing so would reveal business proprietary or other confidential information of
a particular person:

(a) the aggregate number of licences the Party has granted over a recent
period specified in the other Party’s request; and

(b) measures, if any, that the Party has taken in conjunction with the licensing
procedure to restrict domestic production or consumption or to stabilise
production, supply, or prices for the relevant good.

4. This Article does not require a Party to grant an export licence.

Article 2.11: Customs User Fees

1. A Party shall not adopt or maintain a customs user fee or require consular
transactions in connection with the importation or exportation of a good from the territory
of the other Party.

2. Paragraph 1 does not prevent a Party from imposing a customs duty or a charge
set out in paragraphs (a), (b), or (d) of the definition of “customs duty”.

Article 2.12: Exchange of Preference Utilisation Data

1. For the purpose of monitoring the functioning of this Agreement and calculating
preference utilisation rates, the Parties shall annually exchange updated import statistics
for a period starting one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement until five
years after the tariff elimination is completed. This period may be extended by decision
of the Parties through the Committee on Trade in Goods.

2. The import statistics referred to in paragraph 1| shall include data pertaining to the
most recent calendar year available, at the tariff line level for Chapters 1 through 97 of
the HS, on imports of goods from the other Party that are subject to MFN-applied tariffs
and tariff preferences under this Agreement, including information on value, and if
applicable, volume and tariff-rate quotas’ fill rate.

Article 2.13: Trade in Products of Modern Biotechnology

1. The Parties recognise the importance of agricultural innovation and facilitating
trade in products of modern biotechnology including transparency, cooperation, and the
voluntary exchange of information related to the trade in products of modern
biotechnology including policies, legislation, guidelines and good practices.

2. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require a Party to authorise a product
of modern biotechnology to be on the market.

3. Each Party shall, when available and subject to its laws, regulation or policy,
make available to the public and, to the extent possible, online:

(a) information and documentation requirements for an authorisation, if
required, of a product of modern biotechnology;

(b) summary of risk or safety assessment, if any, that has led to the
authorisation, if required, of a product of modern biotechnology; and

(c) list of the products of modern biotechnology that have been authorised in
its territory.

4. To reduce the likelihood of disruptions to trade in products of modern
biotechnology:

(a) each Party shall continue to encourage applicants to submit timely and
concurrent applications to the other Party for authorisation, if required, of

products of modern biotechnology; and

(b) a Party requiring any authorisation for a product of modern biotechnology
shall:

(1) accept and review applications for the authorisation, if required, of
products of modern biotechnology on an ongoing basis year-round;

2-9

(11) if an authorisation is subject to expiration, take steps to help ensure
that the review of the product is completed and decision is made in
a timely manner, and if possible, prior to expiration; and

(111) | communicate with the other Party regarding any new and existing
authorisations of products of modern biotechnology, so as to
improve information exchange.

5. Each Party shall endeavour to adopt or maintain policies and approaches designed
to facilitate the management of an LLP occurrence.

6. The Parties shall pursue collaborative and trade-facilitative approaches to the
management of an LLP occurrence.

7. In order to address an LLP occurrence, and with a view to preventing a
future LLP occurrence, on request of an importing Party, an exporting Party shall, when
available and subject to its laws, regulations and policies:

(a)

(b)

(c)

provide summary of the risk or safety assessment or assessments, if any,
that the exporting Party conducted in connection with an authorisation of a
specific plant product of modern biotechnology;

provide, if known to the exporting Party, contact information for any
entity within its territory that received authorisation for the plant product
of modern biotechnology and which the Party believes that it is likely to
possess:

(1) validated methods that exist for the detection of the plant
product of modern biotechnology found at a low level in a
shipment;

(11) | reference samples necessary for the detection of the LLP
occurrence; and

(iii) relevant information‘ that can be used by the importing Party to
conduct a risk or safety assessment if appropriate, in accordance
with the relevant international standards and guidelines; and

encourage an entity referred to in subparagraph (b) to share the
information referred to in sub-subparagraphs (b)(1), (b)(ii) and (b)(i11) with
the importing Party.

8. In the event of an LLP occurrence, the importing Party shall, subject to its laws,
regulation or policy:

(a)

(b)

inform the importer or the importer’s agent of the LLP occurrence and of
any additional information that the importer will be required to submit, to
allow the importing Party to make a decision on the disposition of the
shipment in which the LLP occurrence has been found;

on request, and if available, provide to the exporting Party summary of
risk or safety assessment that the importing Party has conducted in
connection with the LLP occurrence;

4 For example, relevant information includes the information contained in Annex 3 of the Codex Guideline for the
Conduct of Food Safety Assessment of Foods Derived from Recombinant-DNA Plants (CAC/GL 45-2003).

2-10

(c) ensure that the measures applied to address that LLP occurrence are
appropriate to achieve compliance with its laws, regulation or policy; and

(d) take into account, as appropriate, any relevant risk or safety assessment
provided, and authorisation granted, by the other Party or non-Party when
deciding how to manage the LLP occurrence.

Article 2.14: Cooperation

1. The Parties recognise that cooperation under this Chapter may advance the
inclusive, effective and efficient implementation and utilisation of this Chapter through
various activities between the Parties.

2. The Parties shall explore opportunities for cooperation relating to:

(a) products covered under Article 2.15, including policies related to LLP
occurrences;

(b) innovative plants and plant varieties and the products derived therefrom;>

and
(c) other matters, as agreed between the Parties.
3. For the purpose of subparagraphs 2(a) and 2(b), that cooperation may include:

(a) information sharing on domestic regulations, policies, and technical
matters;

(b) collaborative dialogue on trade, emerging technologies, and regulatory
streamlining; and

(c) efforts to advance transparent, science and risk-based regulatory
approaches and trade policies with regional partners, non-Parties, and in
international organisations.

4. The cooperation shall take into account, among other things, the different levels
of development, existing bilateral cooperation and collaboration, availability of
appropriate resources, and the national capacity of each Party.

Article 2.15: Committee on Trade in Goods

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade in Goods (“Committee’’),
comprising representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee shall meet at the request of a Party or the Joint Committee,
established under Article 23.1 (Administrative and Institutional Provisions —
Establishment of the Joint Committee), to consider any matter arising under this Chapter.

> Innovative plants and plant varieties means plants and plant varieties produced by means other than conventional
plant breeding methods.

2-11

3.

The Committee shall meet at a venue and time as the Parties decide or by

electronic means. Hosting responsibilities shall alternate between the Parties.

4.

5.

affecting perishable goods, the Committee shall meet within 30 days of a request by a
Party or the Joint Committee and shall be composed of relevant representatives of each

Party.

The Committee’s functions shall include:

(a) monitoring the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) consulting on ways to improve market access between the Parties further

to a request under Article 2.4.3;

(c) consulting on, and endeavour to resolving, any other issues relating to this
Chapter, including, as appropriate, in coordination or jointly with other
committees, subcommittees, working groups, or other bodies established

under this Agreement;

(d) promptly seeking to address barriers to trade in goods between the Parties,
including on agricultural goods other than those within the competence of

other committees, subcommittees, working groups or any other bodies

established under this Agreement and, if appropriate, referring the matter

to the Joint Committee for its consideration;

(e) coordinating the exchange of information on trade in goods between the

Parties;

(f) referring any relevant issues to other committees, subcommittees, working
groups or any other bodies established under this Agreement and notifying

the Joint Committee, as appropriate; and

(g) undertaking additional work that the Joint Committee may assign or
another committee may refer to it.

Notwithstanding paragraph 2, for matters involving issues or trade barriers

CHAPTER 3

RULES OF ORIGIN AND ORIGIN PROCEDURES

Section A: Definitions

Article 3.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

aquaculture means the farming of aquatic organisms, including fish, molluscs,
crustaceans, other aquatic invertebrates and aquatic plants, from seed stock such as eggs,
fingerlings, fry, larvae, post-larvae or seedlings by the intervention in the rearing, or
growing processes, to enhance production, such as regular stocking, feeding or protection
from predators;

competent authority means:
(a) for Canada, the Canada Border Services Agency, or its successor; and

(b) for Indonesia, the Directorate of Export and Import Facilitation,
Directorate General of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Trade, or its successor;

declaration of origin means a document containing a set of minimum data elements in
accordance with Annex 3-A: Minimum Data Elements of the Declaration of Origin;

determination of origin means a determination as to whether a good qualifies as an
originating good in accordance with this Chapter;

fungible goods or materials means goods or materials that are interchangeable for
commercial purposes and whose properties are essentially identical;

generally accepted accounting principles means the principles recognised by consensus
or with substantial authoritative support in the territory of a Party, with respect to the
recording of revenues, expenses, costs, assets, and liabilities; the disclosure of
information; and the preparation of financial statements. These principles may encompass
broad guidelines for general application as well as detailed standards, practices, and
procedures;

indirect material means a material used in the production, testing, or inspection of
another good but not physically incorporated into that good, or a material used in the
maintenance of buildings or the operation of equipment associated with the production of
a good, including:

(a) fuel, energy, catalysts, and solvents;

(b) equipment, devices, and supplies used for testing or inspection of the
goods;

(c) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment, and supplies;
(d) tools, dies, and moulds;

(e) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and
buildings;

3-1

(f) lubricants, greases, compounding materials, and other materials used in
production, or used to operate equipment or in the maintenance of
buildings, and

(g) any other material that is not incorporated into the good but the use of
which in the production of the good can reasonably be demonstrated to be
a part of that production;

material means a good that is used in the production of another good, and includes a part
or ingredient;

non-originating good or non-originating material means a good or material that does
not qualify as originating in accordance with this Chapter;

originating good or originating material means a good or material that qualifies as
originating in accordance with this Chapter;

packaging materials and containers means materials and containers in which a good is
packaged for retail sale;

packing materials and containers for transportation and shipment means materials
and containers that are used to protect a good during its transportation;

production means methods for obtaining goods, including growing, raising, harvesting,
cultivating, picking, fishing, hunting, capturing, aquaculture, gathering, extracting,
manufacturing, processing, or assembling a good;

value of the good means the price paid or payable to the producer of the good at the
place where the last production was carried out, must include the value of all materials,
and may include the cost of domestic transport from the place of production to the port of
export as well as all costs incurred at the port of export. If there is no price paid or
payable or if it does not include the value of all materials, the value of the good:

(a) must include the value of all materials and the cost of production
employed in producing the good, calculated in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles; and

(b) may include amounts for general expenses and profit to the producer that
can be reasonably allocated to the good.

Any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the good obtained is exported are
excluded; and

value of non-originating materials means the customs value of the material at the time
of its importation into a Party as determined in accordance with the Customs Valuation
Agreement. The value of non-originating material must include any costs incurred in
transporting the material to the place of importation, such as transportation, loading,
unloading, handling, or insurance. If the customs value is not known or cannot be
ascertained, the value of non-originating materials is the first ascertainable price paid for
the materials in a Party.

Section B: Rules of Origin

Article 3.2: Originating Goods

Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, each Party shall provide that a good
is originating if it is:

(a)

(b)

(c)

wholly obtained or produced in the territory of a Party as provided in
Article 3.3 (Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods);

produced in the territory of a Party exclusively from originating materials
of one or both of the Parties; or

produced in the territory of a Party using non-originating materials
provided that the good satisfies the requirements set out in Annex 3-B
(Product-Specific Rules of Origin);

and the good satisfies all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

Article 3.3: Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

Each Party shall provide that for the purposes of Article 3.2 (Originating Goods),
the following goods are considered wholly obtained or produced in the territory of a

Party:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

a plant, plant good, or a fungi good grown, cultivated, harvested, picked,
or gathered there;

a live animal born and raised there;
a good obtained from a live animal there;

a good obtained by hunting, trapping, fishing, aquaculture, gathering, or
capturing there;

a mineral or other naturally occurring substance not included in
subparagraphs (a) through (d), extracted or taken from there;

a good, other than a fish, crustacean, mollusc, and other marine life, taken
by a Party or a person of a Party from the waters, seabed, ocean floor, or
subsoil outside the territories of the Parties, including from the exclusive
economic zones of any Party or non-Party, provided that that Party or the
person of that Party has the right to exploit that seabed, ocean floor, or
subsoil in accordance with international law, including the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea;

a good of sea-fishing or other marine life, taken from the waters outside
the territories of the Parties by vessels that are registered, listed, or
recorded and entitled to fly the flag of that Party and that that Party has the
right to exploit those waters in accordance with international law;

a good produced on board a factory ship, exclusively from a good referred

to in subparagraph (g), provided that the factory ship is registered, listed,
or recorded in a Party and entitled to fly the flag of that Party;

3-3

(1) a good that is:

(1) waste or scrap derived from production or consumption there,
provided that such goods are fit only for the recovery of raw
materials, or for recycling purposes; or

(11) | a used good collected there, provided that it is fit only for the
recovery of raw materials, or for recycling purposes; or

(j) a good obtained or produced exclusively from goods referred to in
subparagraphs (a) through (1), or from their derivatives.

Article 3.4: Accumulation

1. Each Party shall provide that a good 1s originating if the good is produced in the
territory of one or both of the Parties by one or more producers, provided that the good
satisfies the requirements of Article 3.2 (Originating Goods).

2. Each Party shall provide that an originating good or material of a Party is
considered as originating in the territory of the other Party when it is used as a material in
the production of a good in the territory of the other Party.

3. Each Party shall provide that an exporter may take into account production carried
out on a non-originating material in the territory of the other Party for the purposes of
determining the originating status of a good. This paragraph shall only apply if:

(a) Indonesia enters into a free trade agreement which contains a provision
with equivalent effect to paragraph 3, upon entry into force of that free
trade agreement and in accordance with and upon completion of each
Party’s applicable legal procedures; or

(b) the Parties decide to apply paragraph 3 following the review provided for
in Article 26.4 (Final Provisions — Review).

4. Subject to paragraph 5, if, as permitted by the WTO Agreement, each Party has a
free trade agreement with the same non-Party, a material from that non-Party may be
taken into consideration by the exporter when determining if a good is originating under
this Agreement.

5. Each Party shall apply paragraph 4 only if equivalent provisions are in force
between each Party and the non-Party and upon agreement by the Parties on the
applicable conditions.

Article 3.5: Materials Used in Production

Each Party shall provide that if a non-originating material undergoes further
production that satisfies the requirements of this Chapter, the material is treated as
originating when determining the originating status of the subsequently produced good,
regardless of whether that material was produced by the producer of the good.

3-4

Article 3.6: Net Cost

1. For the purposes of this Article:

automotive material means a good of heading 87.06, 87.07 or 87.08;
motor vehicle means a good of heading 87.03 through 87.05 or 87.09;

net cost means total cost minus sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs,
royalty, shipping and packing costs, and non-allowable interest cost that are included in
the total cost;

non-allowable interest cost means interest costs incurred by a producer that exceed
700 basis points above the applicable national government interest rate identified for
comparable maturities;

royalty means payments of any kind, including payments under technical assistance or
similar agreements, made as consideration for the use or right to use any copyright,
literary, artistic, or scientific work, patent, trademark, design, model, plan, secret formula,
or process, excluding those payments under technical assistance or similar agreements
that can be related to specific services such as:

(a) personnel training, without regard to where it is performed; and

(b) if performed in the territory of one or both of the Parties, engineering,
tooling, die-setting, software design, and similar computer services, or
other services;

sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service costs means the following costs
related to sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service:

(a) sales and marketing promotion; media advertising; advertising and market
research; promotional and demonstration materials; exhibits; sales
conferences, trade shows and conventions; banners; marketing displays;
free samples; sales, marketing and after-sales service literature (brochures
for the good, catalogues, technical literature, price lists, service manuals
and sales aid information); establishment and protection of logos and
trademarks; sponsorships; wholesale and retail restocking charges; or
entertainment;

(b) sales and marketing incentives; consumer, retailer or wholesaler rebates;
or merchandise incentives;

(c) salaries and wages; sales commissions; bonuses; benefits (for example,
medical, insurance, and pension); travelling and living expenses; or
membership and professional fees for sales promotion, marketing, and
after-sales service personnel;

(d) recruiting and training of sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales
service personnel, and after-sales training of customers’ employees, if
those costs are identified separately for sales promotion, marketing, and
after-sales service of goods on the financial statements or cost accounts of
the producer;

(e) goods liability insurance;

(f) office supplies for sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service of
goods, if those costs are identified separately for sales promotion,
marketing, and after-sales service of goods on the financial statements or
cost accounts of the producer;

(g) telephone, mail, and other communications, if those costs are identified
separately for sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service of goods
on the financial statements or cost accounts of the producer;

(h) rent and depreciation of sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales
service offices and distribution centres;

(1) property insurance premiums, taxes, cost of utilities, and repair and
maintenance of sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service offices
and distribution centres, if such costs are identified separately for sales
promotion, marketing, and after-sales service of goods on the financial
statements or cost accounts of the producer; and

(j) payments by the producer to other persons for warranty repairs;

shipping and packing costs means the costs incurred in packing a good for shipment and
shipping the good from the point of direct shipment to the buyer, excluding costs of
preparing and packaging the good for retail sale; and

total cost means all product costs, period costs, and other costs incurred in relation to the
production of a good in Canada when:

(a) product costs means those costs that are associated with the production of
a good and include the value of materials, direct labour costs, and direct
overhead;

(b) period costs means those costs other than product costs that are expensed
in the period in which they are incurred, including selling expenses and
general and administrative expenses; and

(c) other costs means all costs recorded on the books of the producer that are
not product costs or period costs.

Total cost does not include profits that are earned by the producer, regardless of whether
they are retained by the producer or paid out to other persons as dividends, or taxes paid
on those profits, including capital gains taxes.

2. Each Party shall provide that, for the purpose of calculating the net cost of a good
as set out in Annex 3-B (Product-Specific Rules of Origin), the producer of the good
may:

(a) calculate the total cost incurred with respect to all goods produced by that
producer, subtract any sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service
costs, royalty, shipping and packing costs, and non-allowable interest cost
that is included in the total cost of all those goods, and then reasonably
allocate the resulting net cost of those goods to the good;

(b)

(c)

calculate the total cost incurred with respect to all goods produced by that
producer, reasonably allocate the total cost to the good, and then subtract
any sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs, royalty,
shipping and packing costs and non-allowable interest cost that is included
in the portion of the total cost allocated to the good; or

reasonably allocate each cost that forms part of the total cost incurred by
that producer with respect to the good so that the aggregate of these costs
does not include any sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service

costs, royalty, shipping and packing costs, or non-allowable interest cost.

3. Each Party shall provide that, for the purpose of calculating the net cost of a good
as set out in Annex 3-B (Product-Specific Rules of Origin), the producer may average its
calculation over its fiscal year using any one of the following categories, on the basis of
either all motor vehicles produced by that producer in the category or only those motor
vehicles in the category that are produced by that producer and exported to the territory
of the other Party:

(a)

the same model line of motor vehicles in the same class of vehicles
produced in the same plant in the territory of a Party;

(b) the same model line of motor vehicles produced in the same plant in the
territory of a Party;
(c) the same model line of motor vehicles produced in the territory of a Party;
(d) the same class of motor vehicles produced in the same plant in the
territory of a Party; or
(e) any other category as the Parties may decide.
4. Each Party shall provide that, for the purpose of calculating the net cost of a good

as set out in Annex 3-B (Product-Specific Rules of Origin), the calculation for
automotive materials produced in the same plant may be averaged:

(a)

(b)

over the fiscal year of the motor vehicle producer to whom the good is
sold;

over any quarter or month; or

3-7

(c) over the fiscal year of the producer of the automotive material,
provided that the good was produced during the fiscal year, quarter or
month forming the basis for the calculation, in which:

(1) the average in subparagraph (a) is calculated separately for those
goods sold to one or more motor vehicle producers; or

(11) the average in subparagraph (a) or (b) is calculated separately for
those goods that are exported to the territory of another Party.

Article 3.7: De Minimis

1. Each Party shall provide that a good that does not satisfy the applicable change in
tariff classification requirement in accordance with Annex 3-B (Product-Specific Rules of
Origin) will nonetheless be considered an originating good if:

(a) for a good, other than that provided for in Chapters 50 through 63 of the
Harmonised System (HS), the value of all non-originating materials used
in the production of the good that did not undergo the required change in
tariff classification does not exceed 10 per cent of the value of the good; or

(b) for a good provided for in Chapters 50 through 63 of the Harmonised
System (HS), the total weight of all non-originating materials used in the
production of the good that did not undergo the required change in tariff
classification does not exceed 10 per cent of the total weight of that good;
and

the good satisfies all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

2. The value of non-originating materials referred to in paragraph 1 shall be included
in the value of non-originating materials for any applicable product-specific rule of origin
based on a value requirement as set out in Annex 3-B (Product-Specific Rules of Origin).

Article 3.8: Fungible Goods and Materials

1. Each Party shall provide that a fungible good or material is treated as originating
based on the:

(a) physical segregation of each fungible good or material; or

(b) use of any inventory management method recognised in the generally
accepted accounting principles of the Party in which production is
performed if the fungible good or material is commingled.

2. Once an inventory management method is selected under paragraph 1, that
method must be used for those fungible goods or materials throughout the fiscal year of
the person that made the selection.

Article 3.9: Indirect Materials

Each Party shall provide that an indirect material is an originating material
without regard to where it is produced and its value shall be the cost registered in
accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles in the records of the
producer of the good.

3-8

Article 3.10: Accessories, Spare Parts, Tools, and Instructional or Other
Information Materials

Each Party shall provide that accessories, spare parts, tools, or instructional or
other information materials delivered with a good that form part of its standard
accessories, spare parts, or tools are to be disregarded in determining whether all the non-
originating materials used in the production of the good undergo the applicable
requirements set out in Annex 3-B (Product-Specific Rules of Origin) provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other information
materials are classified with, delivered with, and not invoiced separately

from the good; and

(b) the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts, tools, and
instructional or other information materials are customary for that good.

Article 3.11: Packaging Materials and Containers for Retail Sale
Each Party shall provide that packaging materials and containers in which a good

is packaged for retail sale, which are classified with the good, are disregarded in
determining the originating status of the good.

Article 3.12: Packing Materials and Containers for Transportation and Shipment
Each Party shall provide that packing materials and containers for the

transportation and shipment of a good are not taken into account in determining the
originating status of a good.

Article 3.13: Sets of Goods

Except as provided in Annex 3-B (Product-Specific Rules of Origin), each Party
shall provide that a set of goods, as referred to in General Rule 3 of the Harmonised
System (HS), are considered originating provided that:

(a) all of the component goods are originating; or

(b) if the set contains non-originating component goods, the value of the non-

originating goods does not exceed 25 per cent of the value of the set of
goods.

Article 3.14: Transit and Transhipment
1. Each Party shall provide that an originating good retains its originating status if

the good has been transported from the territory of the exporting Party to the territory of
importing Party without passing through the territory of a non-Party.

3-9

2. Each Party shall provide that if an originating good is transported through the
territory of one or more non-Parties, the good retains its originating status provided that
the good:

(a) has not undergone any further operation in the territory of a non-Party,
except for logistics activities including unloading, reloading, storing, or
any other operation necessary to preserve it in good condition or to
transport it to the importing Party; and

(b) remains under the control of the customs authority in the territory of a
non-Party.

Section C: Origin Procedures

Article 3.15: Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment

1. Each Party shall provide that an importer may, upon importation of a good, make
a claim for preferential tariff treatment, based on a declaration of origin completed by the
exporter or producer, for the purpose of certifying that a good being exported from the
territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party qualifies as an originating good.

2. A Party may allow, in accordance with its laws and regulations, a claim for
preferential tariff treatment to be based on a declaration of origin completed by the
importer that the good qualifies as an originating good. If on the date of entry into force
of this Agreement a Party does not allow a claim for preferential treatment to be based on
a declaration of origin completed by the importer, that Party shall within 5 years
complete a review of the procedures necessary to consider such a claim.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, an importing Party may:!

(a) require that an importer who completes a declaration of origin provide
documents or other information to support the declaration;

(b) establish in its law conditions that an importer shall meet to complete a
declaration of origin.

4. Each Party shall provide that a declaration of origin:
(a) need not follow a prescribed format;

(b) contains a set of minimum data requirements as set out in Annex 3-A
(Minimum Data Elements of the Declaration of Origin); and

(c) may be provided on an invoice or any other document, including a
company letterhead.

5. Each Party shall provide that a declaration of origin may apply to a single
shipment of one or more goods into the territory of a Party provided that the declaration
certifies that each good qualifies as originating.

' Paragraph 3 applies to a Party from the date of implementation of the declaration of origin by the importer under
paragraph 2.

3-10

6. A Party shall not reject a claim for preferential tariff treatment for the sole reason
that the invoice was issued in a non-Party. However, a declaration of origin shall not be
provided on an invoice or any other document issued in a non-Party.

7. Each Party shall provide that a declaration of origin is valid for one year after the
date that it was issued or for a longer period specified by the laws and regulations of the
importing Party.

8. Each Party shall allow a declaration of origin to be completed and submitted
electronically and shall accept the declaration of origin with an electronic or digital
signature.

9. Each Party shall allow an importer to submit a declaration of origin in English. If
the declaration of origin is not in English, the importing Party may require the importer to
submit a translation:

(a) for Canada, in English or French; or

(b) for Indonesia, in English,
and the importing Party may require the submission of the non-translated declaration of
origin.

10. For the purposes of paragraph 8, once a Party receives a declaration of origin
electronically, it shall not require a paper document of the same declaration prior to the
release of the goods in the Party’s territory except in limited circumstances set out in its
laws, regulations, or procedures.

Article 3.16: Basis of a Declaration of Origin

1. Each Party shall provide that if a producer declares the origin of a good, the
declaration-of origin is completed on the basis of the producer having information that the
good is originating.

2. Each Party shall provide that if the exporter is not the producer of the good, a
declaration of origin may be completed by the exporter of the good on the basis of:

(a) the exporter having information, including documentation, that
demonstrates that the good is originating; or

(b) reasonable reliance on the producer’s written representation, such as
information contained in a declaration of origin, that the good is
originating.

3. Each Party shall provide that a declaration of origin may be completed by the
importer of the good on the basis of”

(a) the importer having documentation that the good is originating; or

(b) reasonable reliance on supporting documentation provided by the exporter
or producer that the good is originating.

4. For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph | or 2 shall be construed to allow a
Party to require an exporter or producer to complete a declaration-of origin or provide a
declaration of origin to another person.

> Paragraph 3 applies to a Party from the date of implementation of the declaration of origin by the importer under
Article 3.15.2 (Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment).

3-11

5. The information, including documents and written representations, referred to in
paragraphs | to 3 are subject to the requirements of Article 3.21 (Record Keeping
Requirements).

Article 3.17: Minor Discrepancies and Errors

Each Party shall provide that its customs administration shall not reject a
declaration of origin due to minor discrepancies or errors in it, such as slight
discrepancies between the statements made in the declaration of origin and those made in
the import documentation submitted to the customs administration, or typing or
formatting errors, provided that these do not create doubt as to the validity of the
declaration of origin or the correctness of the import documentation.

Article 3.18: Waiver of Declaration of Origin
1. A Party shall not require a declaration of origin if:

(a) the customs value of the importation does not exceed US $200 or the
equivalent amount in the importing Party’s currency or any higher amount
as the importing Party may establish; or

(b) it is a good for which the importing Party has waived the requirement or
does not require the importer to present a declaration of origin,

provided that the importation does not form part of a series of importations
carried out or planned for the purpose of evading compliance with the importing
Party’s laws, regulations, or procedures governing claims for preferential tariff
treatment under this Agreement.

2. The Parties shall enter into discussions to review this Article within five years
after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 3.19: Obligations Relating to Importation

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, each Party shall provide that, for the
purpose of claiming preferential tariff treatment in accordance with its laws and
regulations, the importer shall:

(a) make a statement forming part of the import document that the good
qualifies as an originating good;

(b) have a valid declaration of origin in its possession at the time the
statement referred to in subparagraph (a) is made; and

(c) provide a copy of the declaration of origin to the importing Party if
required by that Party.

2. Each Party shall provide that, if the importer has reason to believe that the
declaration of origin is based on incorrect information that could affect the accuracy or
validity of the declaration of origin, the importer shall in accordance with that Party’s
laws and regulations correct the importation document and pay any customs duty and, if
applicable, penalties owed.

3-12

3. An importing Party shall not subject an importer to a penalty for making an
invalid claim for preferential tariff treatment if the importer, on becoming aware that their
claim is not valid and prior to discovery of the error by that Party, voluntarily corrects the
claim in accordance with that Party’s laws and regulations, and pays any applicable
customs duty under the circumstances provided for in the Party’s law.

4. A Party may require an importer to demonstrate that a good for which the
importer claims preferential tariff treatment was shipped in accordance with Article 3.14
(Transit and Transhipment) by providing:

(a) transportation documents, including the multimodal or combined
transportation documents, such as bills of lading or waybills, indicating
the shipping route and all points of shipment and transhipment prior to the
importation of the good; and

(b) if the good is shipped through or transhipped outside the territories of the
Parties, relevant documents, such as in the case of storage, storage
documents or a copy of the customs control documents, demonstrating
that the good remained under customs control while outside the territories
of the Parties.

Article 3.20: Obligations Relating to Exportation

1. Each Party shall provide that an exporter or producer in its territory that
completes a declaration of origin shall submit a copy of that declaration of origin to its
competent authority on its request.

2. Each Party may provide that a false declaration of origin or other false
information provided by an exporter or a producer in its territory to support a claim that a
good exported to the territory of the other Party is originating has the same legal
consequences, with appropriate modifications, as those that would apply to an importer in
its territory that makes a false statement or representation in connection with an
importation.

3. Each Party shall provide that an exporter or producer who has completed a
declaration of origin must immediately notify, in writing, every person and the competent
authority of the exporting Party to whom the exporter or producer provided the
declaration of origin if the exporter or producer becomes aware, or has reason to believe,
that the declaration of origin contains or is based on incorrect information affecting the
originating status of a good covered by the declaration of origin.

4. A Party shall not impose penalties on an exporter or producer in its territory that
voluntarily provides written notification pursuant to paragraph 3 with respect to a
declaration of origin.

5. Each Party shall allow a declaration of origin to be maintained in any medium and

to be submitted electronically from the exporter or producer in the territory of a Party to
an importer in the territory of a Party.

3-13

Article 3.21: Record Keeping Requirements

1. Each Party shall provide that an importer claiming preferential tariff treatment for
a good imported into the territory of that Party shall maintain, for four years from the date
of importation of the good, or a longer period as specified in that Party’s laws and
regulations:

(a) the documentation related to the importation, including the declaration of
origin that served as the basis for the claim; and

(b) all records necessary to demonstrate that the good is originating and
qualified for preferential tariff treatment, if the claim was based on a
declaration of origin completed by the importer."

2. Each Party shall provide that a producer or exporter in its territory that provides a
declaration of origin shall maintain, for four years from the date the declaration of origin
was issued or a longer period as specified in that Party’s laws and regulations, all records
necessary to demonstrate that a good for which the exporter or producer provided a
declaration of origin-is originating, including records associated with:

(a) the purchase of, cost of, value of, shipping of, and payment for, the good
or material;

(b) the purchase of, cost of, value of, shipping of, and payment for all
materials, including indirect materials, used in the production of the good
or material; and

(c) the production of the good in the form in which the good is exported or the
production of the material in the form in which the material was sold.

3. Each Party shall provide that an importer, exporter, or producer in its territory
may choose to maintain the records specified in paragraphs | and 2 in any medium that
allows for prompt retrieval and printing, including electronic, optical, magnetic, or
written form in accordance with that Party’s law.

Article 3.22: Verification of Origin

For the purpose of determining whether a good imported into its territory is
originating, the customs administration of the importing Party may conduct a verification
of a claim for preferential tariff treatment by one or more of the following:

(a) a written request for information to the importer, in accordance with
Article 3.23 (Request for Verification of Origin) and Article 3.25
(Supplementary Provisions for Verifications of Origin);

(b) a written request for information to the exporter or producer, in
accordance with Article 3.23 (Request for Verification of Origin) and
Article 3.25 (Supplementary Provisions for Verifications of Origin);

3 Paragraph 1(b) applies to a Party from the date of implementation of the declaration of origin by the importer under
Article 3.15.2 (Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment).

3-14

(c) a verification visit to the premises of the exporter or producer in the
territory of the other Party, in accordance with Article 3.24 (Verification
Visit) and Article 3.25 (Supplementary Provisions for Verifications of
Origin); or

(d) any other procedure to which the Parties may decide.

Article 3.23: Request for Verification of Origin

1. For the purpose of determining whether a good imported into its territory is
originating, the customs administration of the importing Party may, pursuant to
subparagraphs (a) and (b) of Article 3.22 (Verification of Origin), conduct a verification
of a claim for preferential tariff treatment by sending a written request for information to
the importer, exporter, or producer.

2. A written request for information under paragraph | shall:
(a) include the identity of the customs administration issuing the request;

(b) state the reason for the request, including the specific issue the requesting
Party seeks to resolve with the verification; and

(c) include sufficient information to identify the good that is being verified,
which may include the declaration of origin.

3. For greater certainty, if the claim for preferential tariff treatment is based on the
importer’s declaration of origin, the importing Party is not required to request
information from the exporter or producer to support a claim for preferential tariff
treatment.

4. If the claim for preferential tariff treatment is based on a declaration of origin
completed by the exporter or producer:

(a) the importing Party may send a request for information to the importer
under paragraph 1. If in response to such request, the importer does not
provide information to the importing Party or the information provided is
not sufficient to support a claim for preferential tariff treatment, the
importing Party shall request information from the exporter or producer
pursuant to subparagraphs (b) or (c) of Article 3.22 (Verification of
Origin) before it may deny the claim for preferential tariff treatment; or

(b) the importing Party may send a request for information directly to the
exporter or producer under paragraph 1.

5. The customs administration of the importing Party shall provide the importer with
at least 30 days or a shorter period in accordance with its laws and regulations, and the
exporter or producer at least 45 days, from the date of receipt of the written request for
information sent under Paragraph 1 to respond to the request.

6. If the customs administration of the importing Party initiates a verification to the
exporter or producer in accordance with paragraph 1, it shall promptly inform the
importer and competent authority of the exporting Party, only for the purpose of their
awareness, of the initiation of such verification.

3-15

7. If the importing Party conducts a verification, it shall accept information directly
from the importer, exporter, or producer.

8. During verification, the importing Party shall allow the release of the good,
subject to payment of duties or provision of security as provided for in its laws and
regulations. If as a result of the verification the importing Party determines that the good
is an originating good, it shall grant preferential tariff treatment to the good and refund
any excess duties paid or release any security provided unless the security also covers
other obligations, subject to its laws and regulations.

9. The customs administration of the importing Party shall provide the importer with
a written determination of origin that includes the findings of facts and the legal basis for
the determination.

10. ___ Prior to issuing a written determination after a verification under
subparagraphs (a) or (b) of Article 3.22 (Verification of Origin), if the importing Party
intends to deny preferential tariff treatment, it may decide to provide the importer and
any exporter or producer who is subject to the verification or provided information
directly to the importing Party, a period of at least 30 days before the determination is
made, for the submission of additional information relating to the origin of the good.

11. For greater certainty, a request for information pursuant to paragraph | shall not
preclude the use of a verification visit pursuant to Article 3.22(c) (Verification of Origin).

Article 3.24: Verification Visit

1. An importing Party may, through its customs administration, conduct a
verification visit to the premises of the exporter or producer of the good pursuant to
Article 3.22(c) (Verification of Origin), and the applicable procedures, through a request
for a verification visit as described in this Article.

2. Prior to conducting a verification visit, the customs administration of the
importing Party shall request the written consent of the exporter or producer at least
60 days in advance of the proposed verification visit.

3. For the purpose of paragraph 2, the written request for consent of the exporter or
producer to the verification visit shall indicate:

(a) the elements provided in Article 3.23.2 (Request for Verification of
Origin);

(b) the legal authority for the visit;
(c) the proposed date and location for the visit;
(d) the specific purpose of the visit; and
(e) the names and titles of the officials conducting the visit.
4. If the importing Party initiates a verification visit under paragraph 1, it shall, at

the time of making the request for consent to the visit under paragraph 2, provide a copy
of the request to the competent authority of the other Party.

3-16

5. Each Party shall provide that the exporter or producer shall respond within
30 days of the date of its receipt of the written request under paragraph 2 to provide its
written consent or refusal for a verification visit.

6. For greater certainty, the customs administration of the importing Party shall not
visit the premises of any exporter or producer in the territory of the exporting Party
without written prior consent from the exporter or producer.

7. Each Party shall provide that the competent authority of the exporting Party may,
within 15 days of the date of receipt of the copy of the request under paragraph 4,
postpone the proposed verification visit for a period not exceeding 45 days from the
proposed date of the visit, or for a longer period that the Parties may decide.

8. Each Party shall provide that, the exporter or producer may, on a single occasion
and within 15 days of the date of receipt of the request under paragraph 2, postpone the
proposed verification visit for a period not exceeding 45 days from the proposed date of
the visit.

9. A Party shall not deny preferential tariff treatment to a good based only on the
postponement of a verification visit under paragraph 7 or paragraph 8.

10. Prior to issuing a written determination after a verification pursuant to

Article 3.22(c) (Verification of Origin), if the importing Party intends to deny preferential
tariff treatment, it shall provide the importer and any exporter or producer who is subject
to the verification or provided information directly to the importing Party, a period of at
least 30 days for the submission of additional information relating to the origin of the
good.

Article 3.25: Supplementary Provisions for Verifications of Origin

1. For the purposes of Article 3.23 (Request for Verification of Origin) and
Article 3.24 (Verification Visit):

(a) it is sufficient for a Party to rely on the contact information of an exporter,
producer, or importer located in the territory of a Party provided in a
declaration of origin; and

(b) all communication to the importer, exporter, producer, customs
administration, or competent authority of the exporting Party shall be sent
by any means that can produce any confirmation of receipt. The specified
time periods will begin from the date of receipt.

2. If the customs administration of the importing Party conducts a verification under
Article 3.22 (Verification of Origin), it shall:

(a) ensure that the written request for information, or documentation to be
reviewed, is limited to information and documentation to determine
whether the good is originating; and

(b) describe the information or documentation requested in sufficient detail to

allow the importer, exporter, or producer to identify the information and
documentation necessary to respond.

3-17

3. For the purposes of Article 3.22 (Verification of Origin), the importing Party shall
inform the importer, and any exporter or producer who is subject to the verification or
provided information directly to the importing Party, of the results.

4. If verifications by a Party indicate a pattern of conduct by an importer, exporter,
or producer of false or unsupported representations relevant to a claim that a good
imported into its territory qualifies as an originating good, the Party may withhold
preferential tariff treatment to identical goods imported, exported, or produced by that
person until that person demonstrates that the identical goods qualify as originating. For
the purposes of this paragraph, “identical goods” means goods that are the same in all
respects relevant to the particular rule of origin that qualifies the goods as originating.

5. If a pattern of conduct is established, the verification process does not need to be
conducted on future imports of identical goods. However, the importer must be notified
each time the goods are denied preferential tariff treatment. The exporter or producer
must also be notified that the goods have been denied preferential tariff treatment if they
have provided the importer with a declaration of origin after a pattern of conduct has
been established.

6. In conducting a verification of origin of a good imported into its territory pursuant
to Article 3.22 (Verification of Origin), a Party may conduct a verification of the origin
of a material that is used in the production of that good in accordance with Article 3.22
(Verification of Origin), and the procedures in paragraphs 1, 2, and 5 of Article 3.23
(Request for Verification of Origin), paragraphs 1 through 5, 6, 7, and 8 of Article 3.24
(Verification Visit), paragraphs 1(b) and 2 of this Article, and Article 3.26 (Participation
of Observers in Origin Verification).

7. If a Party conducts a verification of a material under paragraph 6, the Party may
consider the material to be non-originating in determining whether the good is an
originating good if the producer or supplier of that material does not allow the Party
access to information required to make a determination of whether the material is an
originating material by the following or other means:

(a) denial of access to its records;
(b) failure to respond to a request for information; or

(c) failure to provide its written consent within 30 days of the date of receipt
of a request for a verification visit under Article 3.24.2 (Verification
Visit).

8. If the customs administration of the importing Party considers the information
obtained under Article 3.22 (Verification of Origin) is not sufficient to make a
determination, it may request the assistance of the exporting Party. On request, the
exporting Party may, as it deems appropriate and in accordance with its laws and
regulations, assist with the verification by providing information it has that is relevant to
the verification of origin. The importing Party shall not deny a claim for preferential tariff
treatment solely on the grounds that the exporting Party did not provide the requested
assistance.

3-18

9. The Party conducting a verification shall, as expeditiously as possible and no later
than 120 days after it has received all the information necessary to make the
determination, provide the written determination under Article 3.23.9 (Request for
Verification of Origin). In exceptional cases, the Party may extend this period for up to
90 days after notifying the importer, and any exporter or producer who is subject to the
verification or provided information during the verification. For the purposes of this
paragraph, information necessary means any information collected pursuant to a
verification request to an exporter or producer, information that may be required
regarding the materials used in the production of a good or any assistance requested
under paragraph 8.

Article 3.26: Participation of Observers in Origin Verification

Each Party shall allow an exporter or a producer whose good is the subject of a
verification visit by the other Party pursuant to Article 3.22(c) (Verification of Origin) to
designate three observers‘ to be present during the visit, provided that:

(a) the observers do not participate in a manner other than as observers;

(b) the failure of the exporter or producer to designate observers does not
result in the postponement of the visit; and

(c) the exporter or producer of a good identifies, to the customs administration
conducting the verification visit, any observers designated to be present
during the visit.

Article 3.27: Determinations on Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment

1. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 2, each Party shall grant a claim for
preferential tariff treatment made in accordance with this Chapter for a good that arrives
in its territory on or after the date of entry into force of this Agreement. In addition, if
permitted by the importing Party, the importing Party shall grant a claim for preferential
tariff treatment made in accordance with this Chapter for a good which is imported into
its territory or released from customs control on or after the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.

2. The importing Party may deny a claim for preferential tariff treatment if:

(a) it determines that the good does not qualify as originating under this
Chapter;

(b) it has not received sufficient information to determine that the good
qualifies as originating pursuant to a verification under Article 3.22
(Verification of Origin);

4 The exporter or producer may designate, as one of the three observers, a single government official to be present
during a verification visit.

3-19

(c) it has not received a response to a written request for information or
questionnaire from the importer, producer, or exporter in accordance with
subparagraph (a) or (b) of Article 3.22 (Verification of Origin);

(d) the exporter or producer does not provide its written consent to a
verification visit pursuant to Article 3.22(c) (Verification of Origin); or

(e) the importer, exporter, or producer fails to comply with the requirements
of this Chapter.

Article 3.28: Refunds and Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment after
Importation

1. Each Party may, in accordance with its laws and regulations, provide that an
importer may apply for preferential tariff treatment and a refund of any excess duties paid
for a good if the importer did not make a claim for preferential tariff treatment at the time
of importation, provided that the good would have qualified for preferential tariff
treatment when it was imported into the territory of the Party.

2. As a condition for preferential tariff treatment under paragraph 1, the importing
Party may require that the importer:

(a) make a claim for preferential tariff treatment;

(b) provide a statement that the good was originating at the time of
importation;

(c) provide a copy of the declaration of origin; and

(d) provide such other documentation relating to the importation of the good
as the importing Party may require,

no later than one year after the date of importation or a longer period if specified in the
importing Party’s laws and regulations.

Article 3.29: Penalties

Each Party shall maintain criminal, civil, or administrative penalties for violations
of its laws and regulations related to this Chapter.

Article 3.30: Advance Rulings Relating to Origin

1. Each Party shall, through its customs administration, provide for the expeditious
issuance of written advance rulings, prior to the importation of a good into its territory, to
an importer in its territory or an exporter or producer of the exporting Party, or any other
person with a justifiable cause, or a representative thereof, concerning whether a good
qualifies as an originating good under this Chapter.

2. A Party may require that the person requesting an advance ruling pursuant to
paragraph | have legal representation or be registered in its territory.

3-20

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for the issuance of advance rulings,
including a detailed description of the information reasonably required to process an
application for a ruling.

4. Each Party shall make the following information available on one or more free,
publicly accessible websites, and shall ensure that the information is updated as
necessary:

(a) the advance rulings procedures as set out in paragraph 3;

(b) newly issued advance rulings pursuant to this Article and Article 4.8
(Customs Procedure and Trade Facilitation — Advance Rulings), in
accordance with its laws, regulations, and procedures, which may be
subject to the consent of the person to whom the advance ruling was
issued.

5. Each Party shall endeavour to allow a person to request an advance ruling through
electronic means, such as via email or through an internet-based system.

6. Each Party shall provide that its customs administration:

(a) may, at any time during the course of an evaluation of an application for
an advance ruling, request supplemental information from the person
requesting the ruling;

(b) issue the ruling within 120 days from the date on which it has obtained all
necessary information from the person requesting the advance ruling; and

(c) provide, to the person requesting the advance ruling, a full explanation of
the reasons for the ruling.

7. When an application for an advance ruling involves an issue that is the subject of:
(a) a verification of origin;
(b) a review by, or appeal to, a customs administration; or
(c) a judicial or quasi-judicial review in the customs administration’s territory,

the customs administration, in accordance with its laws, may decline or postpone the
issuance of the ruling.

8. Subject to paragraph 10, each Party shall apply an advance ruling to importations
into its territory of the product for which the ruling was requested on the date of its
issuance or at a later date if specified in the ruling.

9. Each Party shall issue consistent advance rulings when all relevant facts and
circumstances are identical.

10. A Party may issue a modification or revocation of an advance ruling if:
(a) the ruling is based on an error of fact;

(b) there is a change in the material facts or circumstances on which the ruling
is based;

3-21

(c) it is to conform with an amendment of this Chapter or Chapter 2 (National
Treatment and Market Access for Goods); or

(d) it is to conform with a judicial or quasi-judicial decision or a change in its
law.

11. A modification or revocation of an advance ruling issued in accordance with
paragraph 10 is effective on the date on which the modification or revocation is issued, or
on a later date if specified in the ruling, and shall not be applied to importations of a
product that have occurred prior to that date, unless the person to whom the advance
ruling was issued has not acted in accordance with its terms and conditions.

12. Each Party shall provide that an advance ruling remains in effect and is honoured
unless it has been modified or revoked pursuant to paragraph 10.

13. A Party shall not impose a fee or charge for the issuance or processing of advance
rulings.

14. Each Party shall promote the use of the other Party’s advance rulings by
encouraging its traders to request advance rulings from the other Party.

Article 3.31: Review and Appeal

For greater certainty, the importing Party shall grant the rights of review and
appeal in matters relating to the determination of origin under this Chapter in accordance
with Article 4.18 (Customs Procedure and Trade Facilitation — Review and Appeal).

Article 3.32: Confidentiality

For greater certainty, Article 4.19 (Customs Procedure and Trade Facilitation —
Protection of Trader Information) applies to information that relates to a trader that is
collected or shared under this Chapter.

Article 3.33: Administrative Regulations on Origin Procedures

1. The Parties shall establish and implement through their respective laws,
regulations, or administrative policies, administrative regulations regarding the
interpretation, application, and administration of this Chapter, including the Minimum
Data Elements of the Declaration of Origin contained in Annex 3-A.

2. Each Party shall implement any modification of or addition to the administrative
regulations, referred to in paragraph 1, within such period as the Parties may decide.

3. Each Party shall apply the administrative regulations, referred to in paragraph 1,
in addition to the obligations in the Chapter.

3-22

Article 3.34: Cooperation

1. The Parties shall cooperate, to the extent practicable and subject to available
resources, to jointly organise training programs on trade and customs issues related to
this Chapter, such as simulated audit environment exercises, for the government officials
who participate directly in trade and customs procedures.

2. With respect to goods considered originating in accordance with Article 3.4
(Accumulation), the Parties may cooperate with a non-Party in developing origin
procedures based on the principles of this Chapter.

Section D: Other Matters

Article 3.35: Committee on Rules of Origin, Origin Procedures, and Trade
Facilitation

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Rules of Origin, Origin Procedures,
and Trade Facilitation (Committee), composed of government representatives of each
Party, to consider any matters arising under this Chapter and Chapter 4 (Customs
Procedures and Trade Facilitation).

2. The Committee shall consult regularly to ensure that this Chapter and Chapter 4
(Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation) is administered effectively, uniformly, and
consistently with the spirit and objectives of this Agreement, and shall cooperate in the
administration of this Chapter and Chapter 4 (Customs Procedures and Trade
Facilitation).

3. The Committee shall consult to discuss possible amendments or modifications to
this Chapter and its Annexes, taking into account developments in technology,
production processes, or other related matters.

4. Prior to the entry into force of an amended version of the Harmonised

System (HS), the Committee shall consult to prepare updates to this Chapter that are
necessary to reflect changes to the Harmonised System (HS).

3-23

CHAPTER 4

CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TRADE FACILITATION

Article 4.1: Objectives and Principles

1. Each Party affirms its rights and obligations under the Agreement on Trade
Facilitation, set out in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement.

2. Each Party shall administer its customs procedures relating to the importation,
exportation, and transit of goods, with the objective of:

(a) promoting predictability, consistency, and transparency in the application
of its customs laws and regulations throughout its territory;

(b) facilitating the importation, exportation, and transit of goods that meet its
laws, regulations, and procedural requirements; and

(c) ensuring compliance with its law.
3. The Parties shall seek to promote cooperation between their customs
administrations.
4. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from

administering or introducing a measure that ensures or enhances trader compliance with
its laws, regulations, or procedural requirements relating to the importation, exportation,
or transit of goods, in a manner that is consistent with its international obligations and the
obligations in this Chapter. This includes a measure that seeks to ensure the safety and
security of the Party and its citizens through the proper declaration of goods and the
payment of applicable duties, taxes, fees, and charges by traders.

Article 4.2: Scope

This Chapter applies to customs matters with respect to goods traded between the
Parties in accordance with the respective laws and regulations of each Party.

Article 4.3: Publication and Availability of Information

Each Party shall make the following information available on one or more free,
publicly accessible websites, and shall ensure that the information is updated as
necessary:

(a) information the Party is required to publish under the Agreement on Trade
Facilitation, set out in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement, and Article X
(Publication and Administration of Trade Regulations) of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1947, set out in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement, in a manner that enables persons to become acquainted with
them;

4-1

(b) the Party’s customs procedures relating to the importation, exportation,
and transit of goods, in a manner that is clear and comprehensive;

(c) a description of the procedures and practical steps an interested person
needs to follow for the importation into, exportation from, and transit of
goods through the Party’s territory;

(d) contact information for any enquiry point maintained by the Party
pursuant to Article 4.4 (Enquiry Points);

(e) a comprehensive list of the Party’s governmental authorities responsible
for measures imposed in relation to the importation into, exportation from,
and transit of goods through its territory, including their contact
information;

(f) information on the Party’s security regime and its requirements, if
administered, including the method used to establish a security amount, as
set out in Article 4.10.4 (Release of Goods);

(g) information on the Party’s single window system, as set out in Article 4.12
(Single Window System);

(h) information on the Party’s penalty regime for breaches of customs laws
and regulations, as set out in Article 4.17 (Penalties);

(1) information on how a person may request a review or appeal, pursuant to
Article 4.18 (Review and Appeal); and

(j) information on how a person may submit a complaint, in accordance with
Article 4.20.2 (Standards of Conduct).

Article 4.4: Enquiry Points

1. Each Party shall maintain one or more enquiry points to address enquiries from
interested persons regarding its customs procedures pertaining to the importation,
exportation, and transit of goods.

2. A Party shall not require the payment of a fee or charge for answering an enquiry
under paragraph 1. For greater certainty, a Party may require payment of a fee or charge
with respect to other enquiries requiring document search, duplication, and review in
connection with requests for public access to government records made in accordance
with its laws and regulations.

3. Each Party shall ensure that a response to an enquiry under paragraph | is
provided within a reasonable period of time, which may vary depending on the nature or
complexity of the request.

Article 4.5: Trader Consultation

1. If a Party proposes to adopt a regulation of general application governing trade
and customs matters relating to goods, that Party shall, to the extent possible and in
accordance with its law:

(a) publish the proposed regulation on a free, publicly accessible website; or

(b) make information on the proposed regulation available free of charge and
through any electronic means,

as early as possible, before its adoption.

2. Each Party shall, to the extent possible and in accordance with its law, provide
interested persons the opportunity to comment on a proposed regulation referred to in
paragraph 1.

3. Each Party shall allow for communication between its customs administration and
traders within its territory regarding its procedures related to the importation, exportation,
and transit of goods, including emerging issues. These communications may take place
regularly or on an ad hoc basis.

Article 4.6: Tariff Classification of Goods

For the purposes of determining the tariff classification of goods traded between
the Parties, each Party shall apply the Harmonised System (HS).

Article 4.7: Customs Valuation of Goods

1. For the purposes of determining the customs value of goods traded between the
Parties, each Party shall apply the provisions contained in Part I and Annex I of the
Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade 1994 (Customs Valuation Agreement), set out in Annex 1A of the

WTO Agreement.

2. In applying paragraph 1, each Party shall examine the customs value of an
imported good on its own merit, giving due consideration to the circumstances
surrounding the individual importation. To this end, a Party shall not reject the
application of the “transaction value” method under Article 1 of the Customs Valuation
Agreement, solely based on the fact that the price declared for an imported good 1s lower
than the prevailing market prices for identical imported goods, or lower than the
prevailing market prices for similar imported goods, as applicable.

3. To the greatest extent possible, if an import declaration has been presented and
the customs administration of the importing Party has reason to doubt the truth or
accuracy of the particulars of the declaration, or of documents produced in support of the
declared customs value, the Party’s customs administration shall apply the provisions
contained in Decision 6.1 of the WTO Committee on Customs Valuation.

4. For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Article, a Party’s communication in

writing as referred to in the Customs Valuation Agreement or in Decision 6.1 of the
WTO Committee on Customs Valuation may be done through electronic means.

4-3

Article 4.8: Advance Rulings
1. Each Party shall issue an advance ruling on:

(a) the tariff classification of a good, in accordance with the Harmonised
System (HS);

(b) the appropriate method or criteria to be used for determining the customs
value of a good, under a particular set of facts, in accordance with the
Customs Valuation Agreement;

(c) the origin of a good; and
(d) any other matter that the Parties may decide.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, each Party shall issue advance rulings in
accordance with Article 3.30 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures — Advance Rulings
Relating to Origin).

Article 4.9: Pre-Arrival Processing

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures allowing for the submission of
information, including documentation or data, required for the importation of goods, in
order to begin processing prior to the arrival of goods with a view to expediting the
release of goods upon arrival.

2. Each Party shall, as appropriate, provide for the advance submission of
information, including documentation or data, referred to in paragraph | in electronic
format for pre-arrival processing of this information.

Article 4.10: Release of Goods

1. In order to facilitate trade between the Parties, each Party shall adopt or maintain
simplified customs procedures for the efficient release of goods.

2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that:

(a) provide for the immediate release of goods upon receipt of the customs
declaration and fulfilment of all applicable requirements and procedures;

(b) provide for the electronic submission and processing of information,
including documentation or data, prior to the arrival of the goods in order
to expedite the release of goods from customs control upon arrival;

(c) allow goods to be released at the point of arrival without requiring
temporary transfer to warehouses or other facilities; and

(d) require that the importer be informed when a Party does not release the
goods in accordance with subparagraph (a), including, to the extent
permitted by its laws and regulations, the reasons why the goods are not
released.

4-4

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that provide for the release of
goods prior to a final determination and payment of any duties, taxes, fees, and charges
imposed on or in connection with the importation of the goods, when these elements are
not determined prior to or promptly upon arrival, provided that the goods are otherwise
eligible for release and any security required by the importing Party has been provided.

4. If a Party requires security as a condition for release, that Party shall:
(a) allow for a security instrument to cover multiple importations;

(b) limit the security to an amount that is calculated to ensure compliance with
payment of duties, taxes, fees, and charges, and that must not represent an
indirect protection of domestic traders or goods; and

(c) ensure that the security is discharged as soon as possible after its customs
administration is satisfied that the obligations arising from the importation
of the goods have been fulfilled or, for instruments covering multiple
importations, until it is no longer required by the customs administration.

5. Each Party shall allow goods intended for importation to be moved under customs
control from the point of entry into the Party to another customs office in its territory,
provided the applicable requirements are met.

6. Nothing in this Article requires a Party to release a good if its requirements for
release have not been met.

Article 4.11: Express Shipments

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain expedited customs procedures for express
shipments for at least those goods entered through an air cargo facility while maintaining
appropriate customs control and selection by:

(a) providing for pre-arrival processing of information, including
documentation or data, required to release express shipments;

(b) permitting, to the extent possible, the single submission of information,
including documentation or data, covering all goods contained in an
express shipment through electronic means. For greater certainty,
additional information, including documentation or data, may be required
as a condition for release;

(c) minimising the information, including documentation or data, required for
the release of express shipments;

(d) providing for these shipments, under normal circumstances, to be released
immediately after arrival, provided that all necessary information,
including documentation or data, has been submitted and all requirements
have been met; and

(e) endeavouring to apply the treatment in subparagraphs (a) through (d) to
shipments of any weight or value, recognising that a Party is permitted to:

(1) require additional entry procedures that may vary based on the
weight or value of the good. Additional entry procedures include
declarations and supporting documentation for the assessment and
payment of duties and taxes; and

(11) limit the treatment in subparagraphs (a) through (d) based on the
type of good, provided that the treatment is not limited to low value
goods such as documents.

2. Nothing in paragraph 1 shall affect the right of a Party to examine, detain, seize,
confiscate, or refuse the entry of goods, or to carry out post-clearance audits, including in
connection with the use of risk management systems. Further, nothing in paragraph 1
shall prevent a Party from requiring completion of additional entry procedures and any
necessary information, including documentation or data, for the release of restricted or
controlled goods.

Article 4.12: Single Window System

1. Each Party shall maintain a single window system enabling a trader to
electronically submit, through a single entry point, information, including documentation
or data, required by the Party for the importation of a good into its territory.

2. Each Party shall, through the single window system and in a timely manner,
inform a trader that is using its single window system of the status of the release of
goods.

3. If a Party receives information, including documentation or data, for a good or
shipment of goods through its single window system, the Party shall not request the same
information for that good or shipment of goods, except in urgent circumstances or
pursuant to other limited exceptions set out in its laws, regulations, or procedures. Each
Party shall minimise the extent to which paper documents are required if electronic
copies are provided.

Article 4.13: Risk Management
1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain a risk management regime that enables its
customs administration to focus enhanced customs controls on high-risk shipments and

facilitates the release and movement of low-risk shipments.

2. Each Party shall administer risk management at the border, as well as in the pre-
border and post-border environments.

3. Each Party shall base risk assessment on appropriate selectivity criteria.

4-6

4. Each Party shall use electronic systems for risk management and targeting.

5. Each Party shall design and apply risk management in a manner that avoids
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination, or disguised restrictions on international trade.

6. In order to facilitate trade, each Party shall periodically review and update its risk
management regime, as appropriate.

Article 4.14: Customs Brokers

With a view to allowing traders to fulfil obligations on their own behalf with
respect to the importation, exportation, and transit of goods, a Party shall not require the
mandatory use of customs brokers.

Article 4.15: Consistency

1. With a view to promoting transparency and predictability for traders, each Party
shall adopt or maintain administrative measures that support consistency in the
implementation and application of its customs laws and regulations throughout its
territory. These administrative measures may include, among others, training for customs
officials and the issuance of internal guidance or policy documents.

2. For greater certainty, the administrative measures adopted or maintained pursuant
to paragraph 1 shall not prevent a Party’s customs administration from exercising
discretion, as provided for in its law, in the implementation and application of its customs
laws and regulations.

3. If an inconsistency is discovered in the implementation or application of its
customs laws or regulations, the Party shall promptly seek to resolve the inconsistency, if
practicable.

Article 4.16: Post-Clearance Audit

1. With a view to expediting the release of goods, each Party shall adopt or maintain
a post-clearance audit regime to ensure compliance with its customs and other related
laws and regulations.

2. Each Party shall conduct post-clearance audits in a risk-based manner.

3. Each Party shall conduct post-clearance audits in a transparent manner that
informs the audited person with respect to the Party’s laws, regulations, and procedures,
and promotes future compliance. Once an audit is completed, the Party shall without
delay notify the person whose records are audited of the results, the basis for the results,
and the audited person’s rights and obligations.

4. The Parties acknowledge that information obtained in a post-clearance audit may
be used in further administrative, quasi-judicial, or judicial proceedings.

5. Each Party shall, wherever practicable, use the results of post-clearance audits in
applying risk management.

6. Each Party shall provide in its laws or regulations a fixed and finite period with
respect to record-keeping obligations.

Article 4.17: Penalties

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain a penalty regime addressing breaches of its
customs laws or regulations in relation to the importation, exportation, or transit of goods.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its penalties for breaches of customs laws or
regulations are administered by its customs administration in a transparent and uniform
manner throughout its territory.

3. Each Party shall ensure that a penalty imposed by its customs administration for a
breach of its customs laws or regulations is imposed only on the person legally
responsible for the breach.

4. Each Party shall ensure that a penalty imposed by its customs administration for a
breach of its customs laws or regulations is based on the facts and circumstances of the
case, including any previous breaches by the person receiving the penalty, and is
commensurate with the nature and severity of the breach.

5. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures to:

(a) avoid conflicts of interest in the assessment and collection of penalties,
duties, and taxes by its customs administration; and

(b) ensure the objective assessment and collection of penalties, duties, and
taxes by its customs administration.

6. Each Party shall ensure that when its customs administration imposes a penalty
for a breach of its customs laws or regulations, it provides an explanation in writing to the
person on whom the penalty is imposed, specifying:

(a) the nature of the breach, including the specific laws or regulations
concerned;

(b) the basis for determining the penalty amount if not set forth specifically in
the laws, regulations, or procedures; and

(c) the rights and obligations of the person on whom the penalty is imposed.

7. Each Party shall provide in its laws, regulations, or procedures, or otherwise give
effect to, a fixed and finite period within which its customs administration may initiate an
administrative proceeding to impose a penalty relating to a breach of its customs laws or
regulations. For greater certainty, this paragraph does not apply to quasi-judicial or
judicial proceedings.

Article 4.18: Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall provide that any person to whom its customs administration
issues an administrative determination has the right to:

(a) an administrative review or appeal of the determination, by an
administrative authority higher than or independent of the official or office
that issued the determination; and

(b) a quasi-judicial or judicial review or appeal of the determination made at
the final level of an administrative review.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its procedures for review and appeal are carried out in
a non-discriminatory and timely manner, without undue delay.

3. A Party shall not treat a person that has filed a request for review or appeal less
favourably than a person who has not filed such a request, based solely on the filing of
that request.

4. A Party shall not impose a fee or charge for an administrative review or appeal of
an administrative determination. Nothing in this Article shall prevent a Party from
requiring full payment of assessed duties, taxes, penalties, or interest prior to a request for
review or appeal.

5. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that allow for a request for
administrative review or appeal to be submitted through electronic means.

6. Each Party shall ensure that an authority conducting a review or appeal under
paragraph | notifies the person in writing of its determination or decision in the review or
appeal, and the reasons for the determination or decision.

Article 4.19: Protection of Trader Information

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures governing the collection, protection,
use, disclosure, retention, correction, and disposal of information that relates to a trader
and that is collected by its customs administration for the purposes of administering or
enforcing its customs laws and regulations.

2. Each Party shall maintain, through its customs administration, the confidentiality
of all information collected for the purposes of administering or enforcing its customs
laws and regulations and shall protect that information from use or disclosure that could
prejudice the competitive position of the trader to whom the information relates.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may use or disclose confidential
information but only for the purposes of administering or enforcing its customs laws and
regulations or as otherwise provided under the Party’s law, including in an
administrative, quasi-judicial, or judicial proceeding.

4. If confidential information is used or disclosed other than in accordance with this
Article, the Party shall address the incident and strive to prevent a reoccurrence.

Article 4.20: Standards of Conduct

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures to deter its customs officials from
engaging in improper behaviour or action in the performance or exercise of their official
duties, including any behaviour or action that may result in, or reasonably create the
appearance of, the use of their position as a public official for personal or private gain.

2. Each Party shall provide a mechanism for persons to submit a complaint
regarding perceived improper or unlawful behaviour of a customs official in its territory.
Each Party shall take appropriate and timely action in response to a complaint in
accordance with its laws, regulations, or procedures.

Article 4.21: Cooperation and Committee

1. Each Party shall designate at least one contact point for the purposes of
facilitating the administration of this Chapter and provide the details of the contact point
to the other Party, upon entry into force of this Agreement.

2. Each Party may at any time request consultations with the other Party on any
matter arising from the interpretation or administration of this Chapter, including sharing
information on best practices and experiences.

3. Consultations under paragraph 2 may be conducted through the relevant contact
point identified under paragraph | or the Committee on Rules of Origin, Origin
Procedures, and Trade Facilitation (Committee) established under Article 3.35 (Rules of
Origin and Origin Procedures — Committee on Rules of Origin, Origin Procedures, and
Trade Facilitation). Consultations shall be concluded within 60 days of the request. The
period of time for concluding consultations may be extended by the Parties.

4. When a matter raised in a consultation under paragraph 2 cannot be resolved by
the Committee, the Committee may refer the matter to the Joint Committee established
under Article 23.1 (Administrative and Institutional Provisions — Establishment of the
Joint Committee) for guidance and resolution.

5. Nothing in this Article shall prevent a Party’s customs administration from

rendering a decision, or taking any other action within its lawful authority that it
considers necessary, pending a resolution of a matter under this Chapter.

4-10

CHAPTER 5

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

Article 5.1: Definitions

1. The definitions in Annex A of the SPS Agreement, as amended, are incorporated
into and made part of this Chapter.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) competent authority means a government body of each Party responsible
for measures or matters referred to in this Chapter; and

(b) WTO SPS Committee means the WTO Committee on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures established under Article 12 of the SPS
Agreement.
3. The definitions adopted by the:
(a) Codex Alimentarius Commission (Codex);

(b) World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH); and

(c) International Plant Protection Convention, done at Rome
on 6 December 1951 (IPPC),

as amended, are incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.
4. To the extent there is an inconsistency between the definitions referred to in

paragraphs 1 and 2, and those referred to in paragraph 3, the definitions in paragraph 1
prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 5.2: Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) protect human, animal, or plant life or health in the territories of the
Parties while facilitating trade;

(b) reinforce and build on the SPS Agreement and enhance its practical
implementation;

(c) strengthen communication, consultation, and cooperation between the
Parties, and particularly between the Parties’ competent authorities;

(d) ensure that a Party’s sanitary or phytosanitary measures do not create
unjustified barriers to trade and do not constitute disguised restrictions on
international trade;

(e) enhance transparency and understanding on the development and
application of each Party’s sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

(f) encourage the development and adoption of science-based international

standards, guidelines, and recommendations, and promote their
implementation by the Parties; and

5-1

(g) advance and further promote science-based decision making.

Article 5.3: Scope

This Chapter applies to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures of a Party that
may, directly or indirectly, affect trade between the Parties.

Article 5.4: General Provisions

The following provisions of the SPS Agreement, as amended, are incorporated
into and made part of this Chapter:

(a) Article 1;

(b) Article 2;

(c) Article 3;

(d) Article 4;

(e) Article 5;

(f) Article 6;

(g) Article 7 and Annex B;

(h) Article 8 and Annex C; and

(i) Article 13.

Article 5.5: Equivalence

1. The Parties acknowledge that recognition of the equivalence of sanitary and
phytosanitary measures is an important means to facilitate trade.

2. Further to Article 4 of the SPS Agreement, the Parties shall apply recognition of
equivalence to a specific sanitary or phytosanitary measure, or to the extent feasible and
appropriate, to a group of measures or on a systems-wide basis. In determining the
equivalence of a specific sanitary or phytosanitary measure, group of measures, or on a
systems-wide basis, each Party shall take into account the relevant decisions and
guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines, and
recommendations.

3. In determining the equivalence of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, the
importing Party shall take into account available knowledge, information, and relevant
experience, including knowledge acquired through experience with the exporting Party’s
relevant competent authority.

4. On request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall explain the objective

and rationale of its sanitary or phytosanitary measure and identify the risk the sanitary or
phytosanitary measure is intended to address.

5-2

5. When the importing Party receives a request for an equivalence determination and
determines that the information provided by the exporting Party is sufficient, it shall
initiate the equivalence assessment within a reasonable period of time.

6. On request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall inform the exporting
Party of the status of the equivalence assessment.

7. When the importing Party initiates an equivalence assessment, it shall explain, on
request of the exporting Party, and without undue delay, its equivalence process, and, if
the determination results in recognition of equivalence, its plan for enabling trade.

8. The importing Party shall recognise the equivalence of a sanitary or phytosanitary
measure, group of measures, or system, even if the measure, group of measures, or
system differs from its own, if the exporting Party objectively demonstrates to the
importing Party that the exporting Party’s measure achieves the importing Party’s
appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection taking into account outcomes
that the exporting Party’s measures, group of measures, or system achieves.

9. If the importing Party accepts the exporting Party’s sanitary or phytosanitary
measures, group of measures, or system as equivalent, the importing Party shall
communicate this acceptance to the exporting Party in writing and shall apply this
recognition to trade from the exporting Party as soon as practical.

10. If an equivalence assessment does not result in acceptance of equivalence, the
importing Party shall communicate that determination and its rationale to the exporting
Party without undue delay.

11. If a Party plans to adopt, modify, or repeal a measure that is the subject of a
sanitary or phytosanitary equivalence recognition, the following applies:

(a) that Party shall notify the other Party of its plan. The notification should
take place at an appropriately early stage when any comments submitted
by the other Party can be taken into account, including by revising its plan.
Upon request of a Party, the Parties shall discuss whether the adoption,
modification, or repeal of the measure may affect the equivalence
recognition;

(b) that Party shall, upon request of the other Party, provide information and
rationale concerning its planned adoption, modification, or repeal. The
other Party shall review any information provided to it and submit any
comments to the Party that plans to adopt, modify, or repeal the measure
without unjustifiable delay; and

(c) the importing Party shall not revoke its recognition of equivalence on the
basis that an adoption, modification, or repeal of the measure is pending.

12. If a Party adopts, modifies, or repeals a measure that is the subject of a sanitary or
phytosanitary recognition of equivalence, the importing Party shall maintain its
recognition of equivalence if the exporting Party objectively demonstrates that the
exporting Party’s measures concerning the good continue to achieve the appropriate level
of sanitary or phytosanitary protection of the importing Party. Upon request of a Party,
the Parties shall promptly discuss the determination made by the importing Party.

Article 5.6: Science and Risk Analysis

1. Recognising the Parties’ rights and obligations under the relevant provisions of
the SPS Agreement, this Chapter does not prevent a Party from:

(a) establishing its appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary
protection; and

(b) establishing or maintaining an approval procedure, including an import
requirement, that requires a risk assessment to be conducted before that
Party grants a good access to its market.

2. In conducting its risk assessment and risk management, each Party shall:

(a) ensure that each risk assessment it conducts is appropriate to the
circumstances of the risk to human, animal, or plant life or health, and
takes into account the available relevant scientific evidence; and

(b) take into account the relevant decisions and guidance of the WTO SPS
Committee and international standards, guidelines, and recommendations.

3. Each Party shall conduct its risk assessment and risk management with respect to
a sanitary or phytosanitary regulation within the scope of Annex B of the SPS Agreement
in a manner that is documented and provides the other Party an opportunity to comment.

4. Each Party shall consider, as a risk management option, taking no additional
sanitary or phytosanitary measure if that would achieve the Party’s appropriate level of
sanitary or phytosanitary protection.

5. If the importing Party requires a risk assessment to evaluate a request from the
exporting Party to authorise the importation of a good of the exporting Party, the
importing Party shall provide, on request of the exporting Party, an explanation of the
information required for the risk assessment. On receipt of the requisite information from
the exporting Party, the importing Party shall endeavour to facilitate the evaluation of the
request for authorisation by scheduling work on this request in accordance with the
available resources and applicable procedures, policies, laws, and regulations of the
importing Party.

6. On request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall inform the exporting
Party of the status of any risk assessment, risk management, or other evaluation the
importing Party requires to facilitate trade and of any delay that may occur during the
process.

7. If the importing Party, as a result of a risk assessment, adopts a sanitary or
phytosanitary measure that may facilitate trade between the Parties, the importing Party
shall implement the measure within a reasonable period of time.

8. Without prejudice to Article 5.9 (Emergency Measures), a Party shall not stop the
importation of a good of the other Party for the reason that the importing Party is
undertaking a review of its sanitary or phytosanitary measure, if the importing Party
permitted the importation of that good of the other Party when the review was initiated.
The importing Party shall not be considered as having stopped imports for the reason that
it is undertaking a review if that Party stops the importation of a good on the basis that
the review identified that the information necessary to permit the importation of a good is
lacking. For greater certainty, nothing in this paragraph prevents a Party from taking
action to address an urgent problem of human, animal, or plant life or health that arises or
threatens to arise.

9. In conducting its risk assessment or risk management to facilitate trade between
the Parties, a Party may request information from the other Party. A Party that receives a
request for information shall endeavour to provide available information to the Party that
requested the information within a reasonable period of time and, if possible, by
electronic means.

10. In conducting its risk management, a Party may establish an arrangement with the
other Party to facilitate the trade of a good that is the subject of a Party’s sanitary or
phytosanitary measure. With respect to any such arrangement, the Parties shall take into
account the relevant decisions and guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and
international standards, guidelines, or recommendations.

Article 5.7: Adaptation to Regional Conditions, Including Pest- or Disease-Free
Areas and Areas of Low Pest or Disease Prevalence

1. Further to Article 6.2 of the SPS Agreement, each Party shall recognise the
concepts of zoning and compartmentalisation.

2. The Parties may cooperate on the recognition of regional conditions, including
pest- or disease-free areas, areas of low pest or disease prevalence, pest-free places of
production, or pest-free production sites, and zoning or compartmentalisation, with the
objective of acquiring confidence in the procedures followed by each Party for that
recognition.

3. In making a determination regarding adaptation to regional conditions, each Party
shall take into account the relevant decisions and guidance of the WTO SPS Committee
and international standards, guidelines, and recommendations.

4. When the importing Party receives a request for a determination of regional
conditions from the exporting Party and determines that the information provided by the
exporting Party is sufficient, the importing Party shall initiate the assessment within a
reasonable period of time.

5. When the importing Party commences an assessment of a request for a
determination of regional conditions under paragraph 4, that Party shall, on request of the
exporting Party, explain its process for making the determination of regional conditions
without unjustifiable delay.

6. On request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall inform the exporting
Party of the status of the assessment of the exporting Party’s request for a determination
of regional conditions.

7. The importing Party shall finalise the evaluation and all necessary stages involved
for the determination of regional conditions of the exporting Party without undue delay
once the importing Party’s competent authority determines that it has received sufficient
information from the exporting Party.

8. If the evaluation of the evidence provided by the exporting Party does not result in
a determination to recognise the regional conditions, the importing Party shall provide to
the exporting Party the rationale for its determination, in writing, within a reasonable
period of time.

9. When an importing Party adopts a sanitary or phytosanitary measure

that recognises specific regional conditions of the exporting Party, the importing Party
shall communicate that decision and the measure to the exporting Party, in writing, and
implement the measure within a reasonable period of time.

10. The importing and exporting Parties involved in a particular determination of
regional conditions may also decide in advance the risk management measures that shall
apply to trade between them in the event of a change in status.

11. If there is an incident that results in a change of status, the exporting Party shall
inform the importing Party. If the importing Party modifies or revokes the determination
recognising regional conditions as a result of the change in status, on request of the
exporting Party, the Parties shall cooperate to assess whether the determination can be
reinstated.

Article 5.8: Transparency

1. The Parties recognise the value of sharing information about their sanitary and
phytosanitary measures on an ongoing basis and of providing the other Party with the
opportunity to comment on their proposed sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

2. In undertaking the obligations of this Article, each Party shall take into account
the relevant decisions and guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international
standards, guidelines, and recommendations.

3. A Party shall notify a proposed sanitary or phytosanitary measure that may have
an effect on the trade of the other Party, including any that conforms to international
standards, guidelines, or recommendations, by using the WTO SPS notification
submission system as a means of notifying the other Party.

4. Unless urgent problems of human, animal, or plant life or health protection arise
or threaten to arise requiring the adoption of an emergency measure, or the measure is of
a trade-facilitating nature, a Party shall normally allow at least 60 days for the other Party
to provide written comments on the proposed sanitary or phytosanitary measure, other
than proposed legislation, after it makes the notification under paragraph 3. The Party
shall consider any reasonable request from the other Party to extend the comment period.
On request of the other Party, the Party shall respond to the written comments of the
other Party in an appropriate manner.

5. The Party shall make available on a free, publicly available official website or
official journal, the proposed sanitary or phytosanitary measure notified under
paragraph 3, the legal basis for the measure, and shall, if consistent with its practice,
publish the written comments or a summary of the written comments that Party has
received from the public on the measure.

6. If a Party proposes a sanitary or phytosanitary measure which does not conform to
a relevant international standard, guideline, or recommendation, that Party shall provide
to the other Party, on request, the relevant documentation that the Party considered in
developing the proposed measure, including documented and objective scientific
evidence that is rationally related to the measure, such as risk assessments, relevant
studies, and expert opinions.

7. A Party that proposes to adopt a sanitary or phytosanitary measure shall discuss
with the other Party, on request and if appropriate and feasible, any scientific or trade
concerns that the other Party may raise regarding the proposed measure and the
availability of alternative, less trade-restrictive approaches for achieving the Party’s
appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection.

8. Upon request, a Party shall, within 30 days of the request, provide the other Party
with the documents or a summary of the documents describing the requirements of
proposed sanitary or phytosanitary measures notified to the WTO. If possible, each Party
shall endeavour to make the information available in English.

9. Following the notification of sanitary or phytosanitary measures to the WTO,
upon request, a Party shall provide the other Party with the documents or a summary of
the documents describing the requirements of the adopted sanitary or phytosanitary
measures, within a reasonable period of time as decided by the Parties. If possible, each
Party shall endeavour to make the information available in English.

10. Each Party shall publish, preferably by electronic means, notices of final sanitary
or phytosanitary measures in an official website or official journal.

11. Each Party shall notify the other Party of final sanitary or phytosanitary measures
through the WTO SPS notification submission system. Each Party shall ensure that the
text or the notice of a final sanitary or phytosanitary measure specifies the date on which
the measure takes effect and the legal basis for the measure. In accordance with a Party’s
relevant rules and procedures, and to the extent permitted by the confidentiality and
privacy requirements of the Party’s applicable laws and regulations, a Party shall make
available to the other Party, on request, significant written comments and relevant
documentation considered to support the measure that were received during the comment
period.

12. If a final sanitary or phytosanitary measure is substantively altered from the
proposed measure, a Party shall also include in the notice of the final sanitary or
phytosanitary measure that it publishes, an explanation of:

(a) the objective and rationale of the measure and how the measure advances
that objective and rationale; and

(b) any substantive revisions that it made to the proposed measure.
13. The exporting Party shall notify the importing Party through the contact points
referred to in Article 5.15 (Competent Authorities and Contact Points) in a timely and

appropriate manner:

(a) if it has knowledge of a significant sanitary or phytosanitary risk related to
the export of a good from its territory;

5-7

(b) of urgent situations where a change in animal or plant health status in the
territory of the exporting Party may affect current trade;

(c) of significant changes in the status of a regionalised pest or disease;

(d) of new scientific findings of importance which affect the regulatory
response with respect to food safety, pests, or diseases; and

(e) of significant changes in food safety, pest, or disease management,
control, or eradication policies or practices that may affect current trade.

14. If feasible and appropriate, a Party shall normally provide an interval of not less
than six months between the date it publishes a final sanitary or phytosanitary measure
and the date on which the measure takes effect, unless the measure is intended to address
an urgent problem of human, animal, or plant life or health protection or the measure
facilitates trade.

15. Paragraphs 1 to 14 apply to sanitary or phytosanitary measures that constitute
sanitary or phytosanitary regulations for the purposes of Annex B of the SPS Agreement.

16. A Party shall provide to the other Party, on request, all sanitary or phytosanitary
measures related to the importation of a good into that Party’s territory.

Article 5.9: Emergency Measures

1. If the importing Party adopts an emergency measure to address an urgent problem
of human, animal, or plant life or health that arises or threatens to arise and applies it to
the exports of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall promptly notify the exporting
Party in writing of that measure through the contact points referred to in Article 5.15
(Competent Authorities and Contact Points). The importing Party shall take into
consideration any information provided by the exporting Party in response to the
notification.

2. If the importing Party adopts an emergency measure under paragraph 1, it shall
assess the scientific basis of that measure within six months and make available, on
request, the results of the assessment to the exporting Party. If the emergency measure is
maintained after the assessment because the reason for its adoption remains, the
importing Party shall review the application of the measure periodically.

Article 5.10: Import Checks

1. In applying import checks, each Party shall take into account the relevant
decisions and guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards,
guidelines, and recommendations.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its import checks are based on the risks associated
with importations and are carried out without unjustifiable delay.

5-8

3. Each Party has the right to conduct import checks to assess compliance with its
sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

4. A Party shall make available, on request of the other Party, information on its
import procedures and its basis for determining the type and frequency of import checks,
including the factors it considers to determine the risks associated with importations.

5. A Party may amend the frequency of its import checks as a result of an
assessment of previous import checks or as a result of actions or discussions provided for
in this Chapter.

6. The importing Party shall provide, on request of the other Party, information
regarding the analytical methods, quality controls, sampling procedures, and facilities
that the importing Party uses to test a good. The importing Party shall ensure that any
testing is conducted using appropriate and validated methods under a quality assurance
program in accordance with international laboratory standards.

7. The importing Party shall maintain physical or electronic documentation
regarding the identification, collection, sampling, transportation, and storage of the test
sample, and the analytical methods used on the test sample.

8. Each Party shall conduct import checks in a manner that preserves the integrity of
the goods, except for the individual specimens or samples obtained pursuant to the
requirements referred to in subparagraph 1(e) of Annex C of the SPS Agreement.

9. The importing Party shall ensure that its final decision on the action taken in
response to a finding of non-compliance with the importing Party’s sanitary or
phytosanitary measure is limited to what is reasonable and necessary in response to the
non-compliance.

10. _—_‘_If the importing Party prohibits or restricts the importation of a good of the
exporting Party on the basis of non-compliance of that good found during an import
check, the importing Party shall provide a notification about the non-compliance to the
competent authority of the exporting Party, the importer, or its agent.

11. | When the importing Party provides a notification pursuant to paragraph 10, the
Party shall:

(a) include in its notification:
(1) the reason for the prohibition or restriction;
(11) the legal basis or authorisation for the action; and

(111) | information on the status of the affected goods and, if appropriate,
on their disposition;

(b) transmit the notification as soon as possible and no later than seven days
after the date of the decision to prohibit or restrict, unless the goods are
seized by a customs administration; and

(c) if the notification has not already been provided through another channel,
transmit the notification by electronic means, if practicable.

5-9

12. The importing Party that prohibits or restricts the importation of goods of the
other Party due to a non-compliance shall provide an opportunity for a review of the
decision and consider any relevant information submitted to assist in the review. The
request for the review and the information should be submitted to the importing Party
within a reasonable period of time.

13. If the importing Party determines that there is a significant, sustained, or recurring
pattern of non-compliance with a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, the importing Party
shall notify the exporting Party of the non-compliance. On request, the Parties shall
discuss the non-compliance and the appropriate remedial actions that can be taken to
avoid future non-compliance.

14. On request, the importing Party shall provide to the exporting Party available
information on goods from the exporting Party that were found not to comply with a
sanitary or phytosanitary measure of the importing Party.

15. Nothing in this Chapter prevents the importing Party from disposing of goods
which are found to have any infectious pathogen, pest, or pests that, if urgent action is not
taken, can spread and cause damage to human, animal, or plant life or health in the
Party’s territory.

Article 5.11: Audits

1. The importing Party shall have the right, subject to this Article, to audit the
exporting Party’s competent authorities and associated or designated inspection systems.

2. An audit shall be systems-based and conducted to assess the effectiveness of the
regulatory controls of the competent authorities of the exporting Party to provide the
required assurances and meet the sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the importing
Party. The audit may include an assessment of the competent authorities’ control
programmes, and, if appropriate, on-site inspections of facilities.

3. In undertaking an audit, each Party shall take into account the relevant decisions
and guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines, and
recommendations.

4. The Parties shall establish the conditions for carrying out an audit, which may
include on-site, remote, or virtual options for any part of the audit.

5. Prior to the commencement of an audit, the Parties shall discuss the rationale,
objectives, and scope of the audit, and the criteria or requirements against which the
audited Party will be assessed. At that time, the Parties shall also decide the itinerary and
procedure for conducting the audit.

6. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, the auditing Party shall hold an exit meeting
at the end of the audit that includes an opportunity for the competent authority of the
audited Party to raise questions or seek clarification on the preliminary findings and
observations provided at the meeting.

5-10

7. The auditing Party shall provide the audited Party the draft written audit report,
including its initial findings. The auditing Party shall provide the audited Party the
opportunity to comment on the accuracy of the draft audit report and shall take any such
comments into account before making its conclusions. The auditing Party shall provide a
report setting out its conclusions in writing to the audited Party within a reasonable
period of time.

8. In undertaking an audit in cases in which the importing Party has recognised
equivalence on a systems-wide basis, the importing Party shall:

(a) conduct the audit to verify that the audited Party’s system achieves an
equivalent outcome to the appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary
protection of the importing Party; and

(b) audit against the exporting Party’s implementation of the equivalent
oversight and control system.

9. A decision or action taken by the auditing Party as a result of the audit shall be
supported by objective evidence and available data that can be verified, taking into
account the auditing Party’s knowledge of, relevant experience with, and confidence in,
the audited Party’s regulatory controls. The auditing Party shall, on request of the audited
Party, provide that evidence and data to the audited Party for verification.

10. The costs incurred by the auditing Party shall be borne by the auditing Party
unless the Parties decide otherwise.

11. Each Party shall ensure that procedures are in place to prevent the disclosure of
confidential information that is acquired during the audit process.

Article 5.12: Certification

1. The Parties recognise that assurances with respect to sanitary or phytosanitary
requirements may be provided through certificates or other means.

2. Each Party shall ensure that at least one of the following conditions is satisfied
before imposing a sanitary or phytosanitary certification requirement:

(a) the certification requirement is based on the relevant international
standards; or

(b) the certification requirement is appropriate to the circumstances of risks to
human, animal, or plant life or health.!

3. In applying certification requirements, the importing Party shall take into account
the relevant decisions and guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international
standards, guidelines, and recommendations.

' For greater certainty, a certification requirement that does not constitute a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, such as a
requirement concerning the quality of a product or information relating to consumer preferences, is not a certification
requirement that is appropriate to the circumstances of a risk to human, animal, or plant life or health.

5-11

4. The importing Party shall limit attestations and information it requires on the
certificates to essential information that is necessary to provide assurances to the
importing Party that its appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection has been
met.

5. The importing Party shall provide to the exporting Party, on request, the rationale
for any attestations or information that the importing Party requires to be included on a
certificate.

6. The Parties may decide to work cooperatively to develop model certificates to
accompany specific goods traded between the Parties.

7. The Parties shall promote the implementation of electronic certification and other
technologies to facilitate trade.

Article 5.13: Technical Consultations for Issue Resolution

1. A Party (requesting Party) may initiate technical consultations for issue resolution
with the other Party (responding Party) to discuss any matter arising under this Chapter
that may adversely affect its trade by delivering a written request to the Contact Point of
the responding Party. The request shall identify the reason for the request, including a
description of the requesting Party’s concerns about the matter.

2. The Parties shall meet within 30 days of the responding Party’s receipt of the
request, with the aim of resolving the matter cooperatively within 180 days of the receipt
of the request if possible. This meeting, and any subsequent meetings, may be held
virtually or in-person as decided by the Parties.

3. The Parties shall ensure the appropriate involvement of relevant trade officials
and competent authorities in meetings held pursuant to this Article.

4. A Party shall not have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 24 (Dispute
Settlement) for a matter arising under this Chapter without first seeking to resolve the
matter through technical consultations for issue resolution in accordance with this Article.

5. Recognising that Parties may decide to engage in consultations pursuant to this
Article for any length of time, the requesting Party may cease technical consultations
under this Article and have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 24 (Dispute
Settlement) following the meeting referred to in paragraph 2 or if the meeting is not held.

Article 5.14: Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and operation of this Chapter,
the Parties hereby establish a Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS
Committee), composed of government representatives of each Party responsible for
sanitary and phytosanitary matters.

2. The functions of the SPS Committee are to:
(a) enhance each Party’s implementation of this Chapter;

(b) consider sanitary and phytosanitary matters of mutual interest; and

5-12

(c) enhance communication and cooperation on sanitary and phytosanitary
matters.

3. The SPS Committee shall establish its terms of reference at its first meeting and
may revise those terms of reference as needed.

4. The SPS Committee shall endeavour to identify, prioritise, manage, and resolve
any issue that may arise concerning a sanitary or phytosanitary measure that may have a
significant effect on trade between the Parties with a view to facilitating a mutually
acceptable solution including for the purposes of issue avoidance and resolution.

5. The SPS Committee may:

(a) enhance mutual understanding of each Party’s sanitary and phytosanitary
measures and the regulatory processes that relate to those measures;

(b) based on matters of mutual interest, establish and, as appropriate,
determine the scope and mandate of technical working groups in areas
such as animal health, plant health, fish and seafood, and food safety,
taking into account existing mechanisms, to undertake work related to the
implementation of this Chapter; and

(c) facilitate the identification and discussion, at an appropriately early stage,
of proposed sanitary or phytosanitary measures or revisions to existing
sanitary or phytosanitary measures that may have a significant effect on
trade between the Parties, including for the purposes of issue avoidance
and resolution.

6. Further to subparagraph 5(b), any technical working group shall be composed of
government representatives of each Party responsible for the matter, and shall establish
terms of reference at the first meeting and may revise those terms of reference as needed.

7. The SPS Committee shall provide a forum to explore opportunities for further
cooperation, collaboration, and information exchange between the Parties on sanitary and
phytosanitary measures of mutual interest, consistent with this Chapter and subject to the
availability of appropriate resources. These opportunities may include trade facilitation
initiatives, capacity building, and technical assistance on sanitary and phytosanitary
measures.

8. Further to paragraph 7, the Parties:

(a) may jointly identify work on sanitary and phytosanitary measures with the
goal of eliminating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties;

(b) shall endeavour to enhance regulatory cooperation for goods subject to a
sanitary or phytosanitary measure;

(c) shall endeavour to avoid unnecessary duplication of work covered by
bilateral, regional, or multilateral work programmes; or

(d) shall prioritise any activities related to the implementation of this Chapter.

5-13

9. The SPS Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of
this Agreement and once per year thereafter unless the Parties decide otherwise.

10. The SPS Committee shall report annually to the Joint Committee on the
implementation of this Chapter.

Article 5.15: Competent Authorities and Contact Points

1. Each Party shall provide to the other Party a list of its competent authorities and a
written description of the sanitary and phytosanitary responsibilities of its competent
authorities.

2. Each Party shall designate and notify a contact point for matters arising under this
Chapter.
3. Each Party shall promptly inform the other Party of any change to its competent

authorities or contact point.

5-14

CHAPTER 6

TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE

Article 6.1: Definitions

1. Annex | to the TBT Agreement, including the chapeau and explanatory notes, are
incorporated into and made part of this Chapter, mutatis mutandis.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter:

international standard means a standard that is consistent with the TBT Committee
Decision on International Standards;

mutual recognition agreement means an intergovernmental agreement that specifies the
conditions by which a Party will recognise or accept the conformity assessment results
that are produced by the other Party’s conformity assessment bodies that demonstrate
fulfilment of appropriate standards or technical regulations;

mutual recognition arrangement or multilateral recognition arrangement means an
international or regional arrangement among accreditation bodies in the territory of either
Party, in which the accreditation bodies, on the basis of peer evaluation, accept the results
of accredited conformity assessment bodies;

national standard means a voluntary standard that is developed or adopted by a national
standards body;!

TBT Agreement means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, contained in
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement; and

TBT Committee Decision on International Standards means Annex 2 to Part 1
(Decision of the Committee on Principles for the Development of International
Standards, Guides and Recommendations with relation to Articles 2, 5 and Annex 3 of the
Agreement) in the Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the WTO Committee on
Technical Barriers to Trade Since 1 January 1995 (G/TBT/1/Rev.15), as may be revised.

Article 6.2: Objective

The objective of this Chapter is to facilitate trade in goods, including by
eliminating unnecessary technical barriers to trade, and enhancing transparency and
bilateral cooperation.

Article 6.3: Scope

1. This Chapter applies to the preparation, adoption and application of standards,
technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures, including any amendments,
of central level of government bodies, which may affect trade in goods between the
Parties.

' For greater certainty, national standard refers to, for Canada, a National Standard of Canada, and for Indonesia, a
Standar Nasional Indonesia.

6-1

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, this Chapter does not apply to:

(a) purchasing specifications prepared by governmental bodies for production
or consumption requirements of governmental bodies; or

(b) sanitary or phytosanitary measures covered by Chapter 5 (Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures).

Article 6.4: Affirmation and Incorporation of the TBT Agreement

1. Articles 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 and Annex 3 of the TBT Agreement, as amended,
are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.

2. The Parties affirm their existing right and obligations with respect to each other
under Article 1, Articles 10 to 15, and Annex 2 of the TBT Agreement.

Article 6.5: International Standards, Guides, and Recommendations

1. The Parties recognise the important role that international standards, guides, and
recommendations can play in the harmonisation of technical regulations, conformity
assessment procedures and national standards, and in reducing unnecessary barriers to
trade.

2. To determine whether there is an international standard, guide, or
recommendation within the meaning of Articles 2 and 5 and Annex 3 of the TBT
Agreement, each Party shall take into account the principles set out in the TBT
Committee Decision on International Standards.

Article 6.6: National Standards

1. With respect to the preparation, adoption, and application of national standards,
each Party shall ensure that its central government standardising body accepts and
complies with Annex 3 of the TBT Agreement.

2. If modifications to the contents or structure of the relevant international standards
are necessary in developing a Party’s national standard, that Party shall, on request of the
other Party, encourage its central government standardising body to provide information
on any differences in the content and structure of the national standard and the reason for
those differences. Any fees charged for this service by the central government
standardising body shall, apart from the real cost of delivery, be the same for foreign and
domestic persons.

3. The Parties shall encourage cooperation between their central government
standardising bodies, in areas such as:

(a) exchanging information relating to national standards and national
standard setting procedures; and

(b) international standardising activities in areas of mutual interest.

6-2

Article 6.7: Technical Regulations

1. Each Party shall consider conducting an appropriate assessment concerning any
technical regulations it proposes to adopt. That assessment may include, among other
things, a regulatory impact analysis of the potential impacts of the technical regulation.

2. Each Party shall use relevant international standards or the relevant parts of them,
to the extent provided in Article 2.4 of the TBT Agreement. If a Party has not used or has
significantly deviated from a relevant international standard as a basis for a technical
regulation, that Party shall, on request from the other Party, explain why it has not used
the international standard or has significantly deviated from the international standard.

3. Further to paragraph 2, when developing a technical regulation or conformity
assessment procedure, each Party shall consider available alternatives that would be
effective and appropriate to fulfil the Party’s legitimate objectives pursued by a technical
regulation or conformity assessment procedure.

4. Further to Article 2.7 of the TBT Agreement, if a Party does not accept a
technical regulation of the other Party as equivalent to its own, it shall, on request of the
other Party, explain the reasons for its decision within a reasonable period of time.

5. In implementing Article 2.8 of the TBT Agreement, if a Party does not specify its
technical regulations based on product requirements in terms of performance rather than
design or descriptive characteristics, the Party shall, on request of the other Party, provide
the reasons for its decision.

6. For the purposes of applying Articles 2.12 and 5.9 of the TBT Agreement, the
term “reasonable interval” shall be understood to mean normally a period of not less than
six months, except when this would be ineffective in fulfilling the legitimate objectives
pursued by the technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure.”

7. Each Party shall uniformly and consistently apply its technical regulations that are
prepared and adopted by its central government bodies to its whole territory. For greater
certainty, nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prevent local government bodies
from preparing, adopting, and applying technical regulations in a manner consistent with
the provisions of the TBT Agreement.

Article 6.8: Conformity Assessment Procedures

1. The Parties shall encourage their respective accreditation and conformity
assessment bodies to participate in cooperation arrangements that promote the mutual
acceptance of conformity assessment results.

2. Each Party shall, subject to its laws and regulations, accept the results of
conformity assessment procedures conducted by conformity assessment bodies located in
the territory of the other Party under conditions no less favourable than those conditions
applied to the acceptance of the results of conformity assessment procedures conducted
by conformity assessment bodies in its own territory.

> For greater certainty, a Party may decide to set an interval of less than six months between the publication of a
measure and its entry into force in certain circumstances, including those in which the measure is trade facilitative or is
addressing an urgent problem of safety, health, environmental protection or national security.

6-3

3. Each Party shall, subject to its laws and regulations, accord to conformity
assessment bodies located in the territory of the other Party treatment under conditions no
less favourable than those it applies to conformity assessment bodies located in its own
territory.

4. Each Party is encouraged to recognise the competence of an accreditation body
established in the territory of the other Party that is a signatory to a mutual recognition
arrangement or multilateral recognition arrangement to accredit conformity assessment
bodies.

5. Each Party shall ensure that its central government bodies, when evaluating a
conformity assessment body located in the territory of the other Party for the purposes of
designation or accreditation as appropriate, act as expeditiously as possible under
conditions no less favourable than those it applies when evaluating a conformity
assessment body located in its own territory.

6. Each Party shall allow a reasonable interval between the publication of
designation or accreditation requirements established by its central government bodies
and their entry into force, in order to allow time for applicants of the other Party to adapt
to the requirements.

7. If a Party requires conformity assessment as a positive assurance that a product
conforms with a technical regulation or standard, it shall, subject to its laws and
regulations, accept the results of conformity assessment, notwithstanding the conformity
assessment body using a particular testing facility, provided that the testing facility is
accredited and approved in the Party’s territory, when required.

8. Nothing in this Article shall prevent a Party from requesting that conformity
assessment procedures in relation to specific products be performed by specified
government authorities of the Party. In those cases, the Party conducting the conformity
assessment procedures shall:

(a) limit the fees it imposes for conformity assessment procedures on products
from the other Party to the approximate cost of services rendered; and

(b) make the fees for conformity assessment procedures publicly available.

9. The Parties recognise that the choice of conformity assessment procedures in
relation to a specific product covered by a technical regulation or standard may include
an evaluation of the risks involved, the need to adopt procedures to address those risks,
relevant scientific and technical information, incidence of non-compliant products, and
possible alternative approaches for establishing that the technical regulation or standard
has been met.

10. The Parties recognise that a broad range of mechanisms exist to facilitate the
acceptance of the results of conformity assessment procedures conducted in the other
Party. Those mechanisms may include:

(a) promotion of mutual recognition of conformity assessment procedures
conducted by accredited conformity assessment bodies located in the
territory of the other Party, including through mutual or multilateral
recognition;

(b) cooperative arrangements between accreditation bodies or between
conformity assessment bodies;

(c) the designation of conformity assessment bodies in the other Party;

(d) unilateral recognition by a Party of results of conformity assessment
procedures conducted in the other Party; and

(e) a supplier’s declaration of conformity, as appropriate.

Article 6.9: Transparency

1. The Parties recognise the importance of the provisions relating to transparency in
the TBT Agreement. For the purposes of determining whether a proposed technical
regulation or conformity assessment procedure may have a significant effect on trade and
should be notified in accordance with the TBT Agreement and this Chapter, a Party shall
take into account the relevant guidance in the Decisions and Recommendations adopted
by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade Since I January 1995
(G/TBT/1/Rev.15), as may be revised.

2. The Parties acknowledge the importance of transparency in decision-making,
including giving a meaningful opportunity to provide comments on proposed technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures. Further to Article 2.9 and Article 5.6
of the TBT Agreement, when a Party notifies its proposed technical regulations and
conformity assessment procedures that may have a significant effect on trade, it shall:

(a) include in the notification a statement describing the objective of the
proposed technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure and the
rationale for the approach the Party is proposing;

(b) transmit the notification electronically to the other Party through the
enquiry point the Party has established under Article 10 of the TBT
Agreement at the same time as it notifies the WTO Secretariat;

(c) allow for comments after the notification referred to in (b) and consider
them, as appropriate, in the development of the proposed technical
regulation or conformity assessment procedure; and

(d) if practicable, accept a written request from the other Party to discuss
written comments that the other Party has submitted and ensure that
appropriate officials participate in the discussions, such as from the
competent authority that has proposed the technical regulation or
conformity assessment procedure.?

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, if urgent problems of safety, health, environmental
protection, or national security arise or threaten to arise for a Party, that Party shall notify
the technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure that is in accordance with
the technical content of relevant international standards, guides, or recommendations,
using the procedures established in Article 2.10 or Article 5.7 of the TBT Agreement.

3 For greater certainty, circumstances in which discussions will not be deemed practicable include if the Party
requesting discussions has failed to submit its comments in a timely manner, or if discussions would need to take place
after the deadline to submit written comments has passed.

6-5

4. Each Party shall allow a period of at least 60 days following its notification to the
WTO Secretariat of proposed technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures for the other Party to provide written comments, except where urgent
problems of safety, health, environmental protection, or national security arise or threaten
to arise. If practicable, a Party shall consider a reasonable request to extend the comment
period.

5. If a Party has adopted a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure
that may have a significant effect on trade, the Party shall publish, within a reasonable
period of time and preferably by electronic means, information that would help the other
Party understand the technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure. The
information may include an explanation of how the technical regulation or conformity
assessment procedure achieves the Party’s objectives and the date by which compliance
with the technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure is required.

6. Each Party may consider methods to provide additional transparency in the
development of technical regulations, standards, and conformity assessment procedures.

7. Each Party shall publish online and make freely accessible all proposed and final
technical regulations and mandatory conformity assessment procedures, except with
respect to any standards that:

(a) are developed by government or non-governmental organisations; and

(b) have been incorporated by reference into a technical regulation or
conformity assessment procedure.

8. If a Party detains, at a point of entry, a product that is imported from the territory
of the other Party on the basis that the product may not conform with a technical
regulation, it shall notify, as soon as possible, the importer of the reasons for the
detention of the good.

Article 6.10: Cooperation

1. The Parties shall, to the extent possible, strengthen their cooperation in the field
of standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures.

2. The Parties recognise that cooperation can support greater regulatory alignment
and eliminate unnecessary technical barriers to trade between the Parties.

3. Each Party shall, on request of the other Party, give positive consideration within
available resource levels to proposals for cooperation on matters of mutual interest on
standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures.

4. That cooperation, which shall be decided by the Parties, may include:

(a) the provision of advice, technical assistance, or capacity building relating
to the development and application of standards, technical regulations, and
conformity assessment procedures;

(b) exchanging information on regulatory approaches and practices through
their respective contact points; and

(c) enhancing cooperation:

(1) in areas of mutual interest in the work of relevant regional and
international bodies relating to the development and application of
standards and conformity assessment procedures, such as
enhancing participation in the frameworks for mutual recognition
developed by relevant regional and international bodies;

(11) in the development and amendment of standards, technical
regulations, and conformity assessment procedures;

(i111) | as appropriate, to ensure that technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures are based on international standards or the
relevant parts of them and do not create unnecessary obstacles to
trade between the Parties;

(iv) increasing the mutual understanding of the Parties’ respective
systems and mechanisms for standards, technical regulations, and
conformity assessment procedures; and

(v) facilitating trade by promoting the use of good regulatory
practices.

5. The Parties recognise that there are variety of forums for cooperation under this
Agreement, and that the Parties may utilise the mechanisms established under Chapter 19
(Economic and Technical Cooperation) to promote cooperation and capacity building.

Article 6.11: Information Exchange and Technical Discussions

1. The Parties recognise that technical discussions and information exchange can
serve an important function in reaching mutually satisfactory solutions to trade concerns
between them, by promoting cooperation and consultation, including with respect to
relevant technical information. Accordingly, if a Party considers the need to resolve an
issue that arises under this Chapter, it may make a written request to the other Party to
engage in technical discussions. The Party receiving the request shall respond in writing
within a reasonable period of time.

2. The Parties shall enter into technical discussions within 60 days of a Party’s
receipt of a request made under paragraph 1, unless otherwise decided by the Parties,
with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory resolution of the matter that is the subject
of the request.

3. If the Party requesting technical discussions identifies the matter as urgent, the
Parties shall endeavour to discuss the matter as soon as possible.

4. The Party making a request under paragraph 1 shall transmit the request to the
contact point of the other Party. Technical discussions may be conducted via any means
determined by the Parties.

5. A Party shall explain, on the request of the other Party, the reasons for its decision
not to:

(a) accredit, approve, license, or otherwise recognise a conformity assessment
body;

(b) recognise the results from a conformity assessment body that is accredited
by a signatory to a mutual recognition agreement or a mutual or
multilateral recognition arrangement;

(c) accept the results of a conformity assessment procedure conducted in the
territory of the other Party; or

(d) continue negotiations for a mutual recognition agreement or a mutual
recognition arrangement.

6. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, any discussions or information exchanged
under this Article, other than request made under paragraph 1, shall be kept confidential
and be without any prejudice to the Parties’ rights and obligations under this Agreement
and the WTO Agreement.

Article 6.12: Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade (the
Committee), consisting of government representatives, including the respective contact
points, of each Party.

2. The Committee shall meet annually unless otherwise decided by the Parties.
Meetings of the Committee may be conducted in person or by any other means as
decided by the Parties.

3. The Committee’s functions may include:

(a) monitoring and identifying ways to strengthen the implementation and
operation of this Chapter;

(b) encouraging cooperation between the Parties in matters that pertain to this
Chapter, including the development, review, or modification of standards,
technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures and
coordinating cooperation pursuant to Article 6.10 (Cooperation);

(c) facilitating any technical discussions including matters that arise under
Article 6.11 (information Exchange and Technical Discussions);

(d) deciding on priority areas of mutual interest for future work under this
Chapter;

(e) reviewing this Chapter and identifying any potential amendments to or
interpretations of this Chapter for referral to the Joint Committee
established under Article 23.1 (Administrative and Institutional
Provisions — Establishment of the Joint Committee), including in light of
any developments under the TBT Agreement, and reporting to the Joint
Committee; and

(f) carrying out other functions as may be delegated by the Joint Committee.

4. The Committee may discuss, if decided by the Parties, other matters related to
technical barriers to trade including technical regulations, standards, and conformity
assessment procedures by local government bodies.

5. On request from a Party that the Committee discuss a matter related to a technical
regulation, standard, or conformity assessment procedure of a local government body, the
other Party shall accept the request, and within its capacity, may take steps that could
lead to the resolution of the matter.

Article 6.13: Contact Points

Each Party shall, within 30 days of the date of entry into force of this Agreement,
designate a contact point responsible for matters arising under this Chapter and for
coordinating the implementation of this Chapter, and notify the other Party of the contact
details of the relevant official or officials in that contact point, including the telephone
number, facsimile number, email address, and any other relevant details. Each Party shall
promptly notify the other Party of any change to the contact point or the details of the
relevant official. Each Party’s contact point shall:

(a) facilitate the exchange of information between the Parties on standards,
technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures in response to
all reasonable requests for that information from a Party;

(b) | communicate with the other Party’s contact point, including facilitating
discussions, requests, and the timely exchange of information on matters
arising under this Chapter;

(c) communicate with and coordinate the involvement of relevant government
agencies, including regulatory authorities, in its territory on relevant
matters pertaining to this Chapter; and

(d) carry out any additional responsibilities specified by the Committee.

6-9

CHAPTER 7

TRADE REMEDIES

Section A: Anti-Dumping and Countervailing Measures

Article 7.1: General Provisions

1. (a) Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article VI of
GATT 1994, the AD Agreement and the SCM Agreement, including with
respect to the resolution of any disputes in respect thereof.

(b) This Agreement does not impose rights or obligations on a Party with
respect to anti-dumping or countervailing measures. A Party shall not have
recourse to dispute settlement under this Agreement for a matter arising
under this Section.

2. Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures) under this Agreement shall not
apply to the application of anti-dumping and countervailing measures of a Party to
originating goods of the other Party.

Article 7.2: Investigation Procedures

1. The Parties recognise the right of the Parties to apply trade remedy measures
consistent with Article VI of GATT 1994, the AD Agreement and the SCM Agreement,
and further recognise that the practices! stipulated in the following paragraphs of this
Article promote the goals of transparency and due process in trade remedy proceedings.

2. Upon receipt by a Party’s investigating authority of a properly documented anti-
dumping or countervailing duty application in respect of imports from the other Party,
and before initiating an investigation, that Party provides written notification to the other
Party of its receipt of the application and affords the other Party a meeting or other
similar opportunity regarding the application, consistent with that Party’s domestic law.

3. In any proceeding in which a Party’s investigating authorities determine to
conduct an in-person verification of information that is provided by a respondent” and
that is pertinent to the calculation of anti-dumping duty margins or the amount of a
countervailable subsidy, the investigating authorities promptly notify each respondent of
their intent, and:

(a) provide to each respondent at least 10 working days advance notice of the
dates on which the authorities intend to conduct an in-person verification
of the information;

' The practices included in this Article do not constitute a comprehensive list of practices relating to antidumping and
countervailing duty proceedings. No inference shall be drawn from the inclusion or exclusion of a particular aspect of
such proceedings in this list.

> For the purposes of this paragraph, “respondent” means a producer, manufacturer, exporter, importer, and, where
appropriate, a government or government entity, that is required by a Party’s investigating authorities to respond to an
antidumping or countervailing duty questionnaire.

7-1

(b) at least 5 working days prior to an in-person verification, provide to the
respondent a document that sets out the topics the respondent should be
prepared to address during the verification and that describes the types of
supporting documentation to be made available for review; and

(c) after an in-person verification is completed, and subject to the protection
of confidential information’, issue a written report that describes the
methods and procedures followed in carrying out the verification and the
extent to which the information provided by the respondent was supported
by the documents reviewed during the verification. The report is made
available to interested parties in sufficient time for the parties to defend
their interests.

4. If, in an anti-dumping or countervailing duty action that involves imports from the
other Party a Party’s investigating authorities determine that a timely response to a
request for information does not comply with the request, the investigating authorities
inform the interested party that submitted the response of the nature of the deficiency
and, to the extent practicable in light of time limits established to complete the anti-
dumping or countervailing duty action, provide that interested party with an opportunity
to remedy or explain the deficiency. If that interested party submits further information in
response to that deficiency and the investigating authorities find that the response is not
satisfactory, or that the response is not submitted within the applicable time limits, and if
the investigating authorities disregard all or part of the original and subsequent responses,
the investigating authorities explain in the determination or other written document the
reasons for disregarding the information.

5. Before a final determination is made, a Party’s investigating authorities inform all
interested parties of the essential facts that form the basis of the decision whether to apply
definitive measures. Subject to the protection of confidential information, the
investigating authorities may use any reasonable means to disclose the essential facts,
which includes a report summarising the data in the record that contains sufficient detail
to permit interested parties a reasonable understanding of the substance of the
information on the record, a draft or preliminary determination, or some combination of
those reports or determinations, to provide interested parties an opportunity to respond to
the disclosure of essential facts.

6. The disclosure of the essential facts pursuant to paragraph 5 is made in
accordance with Articles 2, 3, 6.5 and 12 of the AD Agreement and Articles 4.6, 12.4, 14,
15, and 22 of the SCM Agreement.

Article 7.3: Initiation of Review

A review under Article 11.3 of the AD Agreement or Article 21.3 of the SCM
Agreement shall be initiated at an appropriate time during the final year of the period of
application of the anti-dumping and countervailing duties, as defined in each Party’s
domestic laws and regulations.

3 For the purposes of this Article, “confidential information” includes information which is provided on a confidential
basis and which is by its nature confidential, for example, because its disclosure would be of significant competitive
advantage to a competitor or because its disclosure would have a significantly adverse effect upon a person supplying
the information or upon a person from whom that person acquired the information.

7-2

Section B: Bilateral Emergency Actions

Article 7.4: Definitions
For the purposes of this Section:
competent investigating authority means:

(a) in the case of Canada, the Canadian International Trade Tribunal, or its
successor notified to the other Party through diplomatic channels; and

(b) in the case of Indonesia, the Indonesian Safeguards Committee, or its
successor notified to the other Party through diplomatic channels;

domestic industry means, with respect to an imported good, the producers as a whole of
the like or directly competitive good operating in the territory of a Party or those whose
collective production of the like or directly competitive good constitutes a major
proportion of the total domestic production of such good;

emergency action means an emergency action described in Article 7.5;
serious injury means a significant overall impairment of a domestic industry;

substantial cause means a cause that is important and not less important than any other
cause;

threat of serious injury means serious injury that is clearly imminent based on facts and
not based on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility; and

transition period means the 10-year period beginning on the entry into force of this
Agreement, except where the tariff elimination for the good against which the action is
taken occurs over a longer period of time, in which case the transition period is the period
of the staged tariff elimination for that good.

Article 7.5: Imposition of a Bilateral Emergency Action

1. A Party may adopt an emergency action described in paragraph 2, if as a result of
the reduction or elimination of a duty pursuant to this Agreement, an originating good is
being imported into the Party’s territory in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or
relative to domestic production, and under such conditions as to constitute a substantial
cause of serious injury, or threat thereof, to a domestic industry producing a like or
directly competitive good.

2. If the conditions set out in paragraph 1 and Articles 7.6 and 7.7 are met, a Party
may to the extent necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury, or threat thereof, and to
facilitate adjustment:

(a) suspend the further reduction of a rate of duty provided for under this
Agreement on the good; or

(b) increase the rate of duty on the good to a level not exceeding the lesser of:

(1) the most-favoured-nation (MEN) rate of duty in effect at the time
the emergency action is taken, and

(11) the base rate of duty as provided in its schedule to Annex 2-A
(Tariff Commitments).

Article 7.6: Notification and Discussions

1. A Party shall, in writing, promptly notify and invite for discussions the other
Party in connection with:

(a) initiating an emergency action proceeding;

(b) making a finding of serious injury, or threat thereof, under the conditions
set out in Article 7.5(1); and

(c) applying an emergency action.

2. A Party shall without delay, provide to the other Party a copy of the public
version of any notice or any report by a competent investigating authority issued in
connection with matters notified pursuant to paragraph 1.

3. If a Party accepts an invitation for discussions made pursuant to paragraph 1, the
Parties shall enter into discussions to review the notification under paragraph 1 or the
public version of a document issued by a competent investigating authority in connection
with the emergency action proceeding.

4. An emergency action shall be initiated no later than 1 year after the date the
proceeding is instituted.

Article 7.7: Standards for Emergency Actions

1. A Party shall maintain an emergency action only for such period of time as may
be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment.

2. That period shall not exceed two years, except that the period may be extended by
up to one year if the competent authority of the Party that applies the measure determines,
in conformity with the procedures set out in Article 7.8 (Administration of Emergency
Action Proceedings), that the emergency action continues to be necessary to prevent or
remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment.

3. A Party shall not adopt or maintain an emergency action beyond the expiration of
the transition period.

4. In order to facilitate adjustment in a situation where the expected duration of an
emergency action is over one year, the Party that applies the measure shall progressively
liberalise it at regular intervals during the period of application.

5. On the termination of an emergency action, the Party that applied the measure
shall apply the rate of customs duty set out in the Party’s Schedule to Annex 2-A (Tariff
Commitments) as if that Party had never applied the emergency action.

6. A Party shall not apply an emergency action more than once on the same good.

7-4

Article 7.8: Administration of Emergency Action Proceedings

1. Each Party shall ensure the consistent, impartial, and reasonable administration of
its laws, regulations, decisions, and rulings governing emergency action proceedings.

2. Each Party shall entrust determinations of serious injury, or threat thereof, in an
emergency action proceeding to a competent investigating authority. Each Party shall:

(a) ensure that those determinations are subject to review by judicial or
administrative tribunals, to the extent provided by domestic law;

(b) ensure that negative injury determinations are not modified, except
through a review referred to in subparagraph (a); and

(c) provide its competent investigating authority with the necessary resources
to enable it to fulfil its duties.

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain equitable, timely, transparent, and effective
procedures for emergency action proceedings in accordance with the requirements set out
in paragraph 4.

4. A Party shall apply an emergency action only following an investigation by the
Party’s competent investigating authority in accordance with Articles 3 and 4.2 of the
Safeguards Agreement. To this end, Articles 3 and 4.2 of the Safeguards Agreement are
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.

Article 7.9: Compensation

1. A Party applying an emergency action shall, after consultations with the other
Party against whose good the emergency action is applied, provide mutually agreed trade
liberalising compensation in the form of concessions that have substantially equivalent
trade effects or equivalent to the value of the additional duties expected to result from the
emergency action. The Party shall provide an opportunity for those consultations no later
than 30 days after the application of the emergency action.

2. If the consultations under paragraph | do not result in an agreement on trade
liberalising compensation within 30 days, the Party against whose good the emergency
action is applied may suspend the application of substantially equivalent concessions to
the trade of the Party applying the emergency action.

3. A Party against whose good the emergency action is applied shall notify the Party
applying the emergency action in writing at least 30 days before it suspends concessions
in accordance with paragraph 2.

4. The obligation to provide compensation under paragraph | and the right to

suspend concessions under paragraph 2 terminates on the termination of the emergency
action.

7-5

Section C: Global Safeguard Measures

Article 7.10: General Provisions

1. (a) Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of
GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement, including with respect to the
resolution of any disputes in respect thereof.

(b) This Agreement does not impose rights or obligations on a Party with
respect to global safeguard measures. A Party shall not have recourse to
dispute settlement under this Agreement for a matter arising under this
Section.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from applying safeguard measures to
an originating good of the other Party in accordance with Article XIX of the GATT 1994
and the Safeguards Agreement.

3. A Party shall not apply, with respect to the same good, at the same time:

(a) a bilateral safeguard measure as provided in Article 7.5; and

(b) a measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards
Agreement.

Article 7.11: Data Presentation and Information
Without prejudice to the protection of confidential information, a Party’s
competent investigating authority shall provide a presentation of the information on the

record in sufficient detail to permit a reasonable understanding of its substance, in
accordance with Article 3.2 of the Safeguards Agreement.

Section D: Other Provisions

Article 7.12: Cooperation On Trade Remedies Matters

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade Remedies, composed of
representatives at an appropriate level from relevant agencies of each Party who have
responsibility for trade remedies matters, including anti-dumping, subsidies and
countervailing measures, and safeguard issues.

2. The functions of the Committee, which operates on the basis of consensus in
respect of all matters, are to:

(a) enhance each Party’s knowledge and understanding of the other Party’s
domestic trade remedy laws, policies, and practices;

(b) oversee implementation of this Chapter;

(c) improve cooperation between the Parties’ agencies having responsibility
for trade remedies matters;

7-6

(d) provide a forum for the Parties to exchange information on issues relating
to trade remedies matters;

(e) establish and oversee the development of educational programs related to
the administration of trade remedies law for officials of both Parties; and

(f) provide a forum for the Parties to discuss other relevant topics of mutual
interest, including:

(1) international issues relating to trade remedies, including those
relating to international trade negotiations; and

(11) practices by the Parties’ investigating authorities in antidumping
and countervailing duty investigations, such as the application of

“facts available” and verification procedures.

Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee shall meet at least once a year.

CHAPTER 8

TRADE IN SERVICES

Article 8.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

commercial presence means any type of business or professional establishment,
including through:

(a) the establishment, acquisition, or maintenance of an enterprise; or

(b) the creation or maintenance of a branch or representative office of an
enterprise, within the territory of a Party for the purpose of supplying a
service;

computer reservation system services means services provided by computerised
systems that contain information about air carriers’ schedules, availability, fares, and fare
rules, through which reservations can be made or tickets may be issued;

enterprise means an enterprise as defined in Article 1.5 (Initial Provisions and General
Definitions — General Definitions), or a branch of an enterprise;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise constituted or organised under the domestic
law of a Party, or a branch of an enterprise located in the territory of a Party and carrying
out business activities there;!

measures adopted or maintained by a Party means measures adopted or
maintained by:

(a) central, regional, or other governments, or authorities; or

(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central,
regional, or other governments, or authorities;

professional service means a service, the provision of which requires specialised
post-secondary education, or equivalent training or experience, and for which the right to
practice is granted or restricted by a Party, but does not include a service provided by a
tradesperson, or a vessel or aircraft crew member;

selling and marketing of air transport services means opportunities for the air carrier
concerned to sell and market freely its air transport services including all aspects of
marketing such as market research, advertising, and distribution. These activities do not
include the pricing of air transport services or the applicable conditions;

service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means, for a Party, any
service that is supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or
more service suppliers;

service supplier of a Party means a person of a Party that seeks to supply or supplies a
service;

' For greater certainty, the definition of “enterprise of a Party” is relevant to the interpretation of “service supplier of a
Party” and Article 8.11 (Denial of Benefits).

8-1

speciality air services means a specialised commercial operation using an aircraft whose
primary purpose is not the transportation of goods or passengers, such as aerial
fire-fighting, flight training, sightseeing, spraying, surveying, mapping, photography,
parachute jumping, glider towing, and helicopter-lift for logging and construction, and
other airborne agricultural, industrial, and inspection services; and

trade in services or supply of a service means the supply of a service:

(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party;
in the territory of a Party to a person of the other Party;

by a service supplier of a Party, through commercial presence in the
territory of the other Party; or

by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party.

Article 8.2: Scope

1. This Chapter applies to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party relating to
trade in services by a service supplier of the other Party, including a measure relating to:

(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

the production, distribution, marketing, sale, or delivery of a service;

the purchase or use of, or payment for, a service;

the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a service,
services which are required by a Party to be offered to the public
generally; or

the presence in the Party’s territory of a service supplier of the other Party
for the supply of a service.

2. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

government procurement;
a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority;

a subsidy or grant provided by a Party or a state enterprise, including
government-supported loans, guarantees, or insurance; and

a measure adopted or maintained by a Party to the extent that it is covered
by Chapter 10 (Financial Services).

> For greater certainty, subparagraph (a) includes the production, distribution, marketing, sale, or delivery of a service
by electronic means.

3 For greater certainty, subparagraph (b) includes the purchase or use of, or payment for, a service by electronic means.

8-2

3. This Chapter does not apply to air services, including domestic and international
air transportation services, whether scheduled or non-scheduled, or to related services in
support of air services, other than the following:

(a) aircraft repair or maintenance services during which an aircraft is
withdrawn from service, excluding so-called line maintenance;

(b) the selling and marketing of air transport services;
(c) computer reservation system (CRS) services; and
(d) specialty air services.

4. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and a bilateral,
plurilateral, or multilateral air services agreement to which both Parties are party, the air
services agreement prevails in determining the rights and obligations of the Parties.

5. If the Parties have the same obligations under this Agreement and a bilateral,
plurilateral, or multilateral air services agreement, a Party may invoke the dispute
settlement procedures of this Agreement only after any dispute settlement procedures in
the other agreement have been exhausted.

6. If the Annex on Air Transport Services of GATS is amended, the Parties shall
jointly review any new definitions with a view to aligning the definitions in this
Agreement with those definitions, as appropriate.

7. This Chapter does not impose any obligation on a Party with respect to a national
of the other Party who seeks access to its employment market or who is employed on a
permanent basis in its territory, and does not confer any right on that national with respect
to that access or employment.

Article 8.3: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to a service or service supplier of the other Party
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own services
and service suppliers.

2. The treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means, with respect to
a government other than at the central level, treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by
that government to services or service suppliers of the Party of which it forms a part.

3. Whether treatment referred to in paragraph | is accorded “in like circumstances”
depends on the totality of the circumstances. Such circumstances include whether the
relevant treatment distinguishes between services or service suppliers on the basis of
legitimate policy objectives, and, if relevant, competition in the economic or business
sector concerned and the applicable legal and regulatory framework.

4. Paragraph 1 prohibits discrimination based on nationality. A difference in
treatment accorded to a service supplier or a service and a Party’s own service suppliers
or services of its own service suppliers does not, in and of itself, establish discrimination
based on nationality.

Article 8.4: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to a service or service supplier of the other Party
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to services and
service suppliers of a non-Party.

2. The treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means, with respect to
a government other than at the central level, treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by
that government to services or service suppliers of the Party of which it forms a part.

3. Whether treatment referred to in paragraph 1 is accorded “in like circumstances”
depends on the totality of the circumstances. Such circumstances include whether the
relevant treatment distinguishes between services or service suppliers on the basis of
legitimate policy objectives, and, if relevant, competition in the economic or business
sector concerned and the applicable legal and regulatory framework.

4. Paragraph | prohibits discrimination based on nationality. A difference in
treatment accorded to a service supplier or a service and a Party’s own service suppliers
or services of its own service suppliers does not, in and of itself, establish discrimination
based on nationality.

Article 8.5: Market Access?

A Party shall not adopt or maintain, either on the basis of a regional subdivision
or on the basis of its entire territory, a measure that:

(a) imposes a limitation on:

(1) the number of service suppliers, whether in the form of a numerical
quota, monopoly, exclusive service suppliers, or the requirement of
an economic needs test;

(11) the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of a
numerical quota or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(111) | the total number of service operations or the total quantity of
service output expressed in terms of a designated numerical unit in
the form of a quota or the requirement of an economic
needs test;> or

(iv) the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a
particular service sector or that a service supplier may employ and
who are necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a
specific service in the form of a numerical quota or the
requirement of an economic needs test; or

4 For the purposes of a Party’s reservations pursuant to Article 8.7 (Reservations), a limitation on the participation of
foreign capital by way of a maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or
aggregate foreign investment is reserved against Article 8.3 (National Treatment) and Article 13.6 (Investment —
National Treatment).

> Sub-subparagraph (a)(iii) does not cover a measure of a Party which limits inputs for the supply of a service.

8-4

(b)

restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint venture through
which a service supplier may supply a service.

Article 8.6: Formal Requirements

Article 8.3 (National Treatment) does not prevent a Party from adopting or
maintaining a measure that prescribes formal requirements in connection with the supply
of a service, provided that these requirements are not applied in a manner which would
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination. These measures include

requirements:

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)

to obtain a licence, registration, certification, or authorisation in order to
supply a service or as a membership requirement of a particular
profession, such as requiring membership in a professional organisation or
participation in collective compensation funds for members of
professional organisations;

for a service supplier to have a local agent for service or maintain a local
address;

to speak a national language or hold a driver’s licence; or
that a service supplier:

(1) post a bond or other form of financial security;

(11) | establish or contribute to a trust account;

(111) | maintain a particular type and amount of insurance;
(iv) provide other similar guarantees; or

(v) provide access to records.

Article 8.7: Reservations

1. Article 8.3 (National Treatment), Article 8.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment),
and Article 8.5 (Market Access) do not apply to:

(a)

any existing non-conforming measure, maintained in the territory of a
Party at:

(1) the central level of government, as set out by that Party in its
Schedule to Annex I-A (Reservations for Existing Measures —
ratchet);

(11) a regional level of government, as set out by that Party in its
Schedule to Annex I-A (Reservations for Existing Measures —

ratchet); or

(111) | a government other than the central or regional levels;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure
referred to in subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a) to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the
conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the
amendment, with Article 8.3 (National Treatment), Article 8.4
(Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), and Article 8.5 (Market Access).

2. Article 8.3 (National Treatment), Article 8.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment),
and Article 8.5 (Market Access) do not apply to:
(a) any existing non-conforming measure, maintained in the territory of a
Party at:
(1) the central level of government, as set out by that Party in its

Schedule to Annex I-B (Reservations for Existing Measures —
standstill); or

(11) | a regional level of government, as set out by that Party in its
Schedule to Annex I-B (Reservations for Existing Measures —
standstill);

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure
referred to in subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a) to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the
conformity of the measure as it existed at the date of entry into force of
this Agreement with Article 8.3 (National Treatment), Article 8.4
(Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), and Article 8.5 (Market Access).

3. Article 8.3 (National Treatment), Article 8.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment),
and Article 8.5 (Market Access) do not apply to a measure that a Party adopts or
maintains with respect to sectors, subsectors, or activities, as set out in its Schedule to
Annex II (Reservations for Future Measures).

4. Notwithstanding subparagraph 2(c), a Party shall not withdraw a right or benefit
from a service supplier of the other Party, in reliance on which the service supplier has
been granted an investment permit, through an amendment to a limitation on foreign
equity participation that decreases the conformity of the measure as it existed
immediately before the amendment.

Article 8.8: Transparency

1. The Parties recognise that transparent measures governing trade in services are
important in facilitating the ability of a service supplier of a Party to gain access to, and
operate in, the other Party’s market. For this purpose, each Party shall promote regulatory
transparency in trade in services.

2. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, maintain or establish appropriate
mechanisms for responding to inquiries from interested persons regarding its laws and
regulations that relate to the subject matter of this Chapter.

3. If a Party does not, in accordance with Article 22.2 (Transparency,
Anti-corruption, and Responsible Business Conduct — Publication), publish in advance
and provide an opportunity to comment on its laws and regulations that relate to the
subject matter of this Chapter, it shall, at the request of the other Party, endeavour to
provide in writing the reasons for not doing so.

8-6

Article 8.9: Development and Administration of Measures

1. The Parties recognise the right of each Party to regulate and to introduce new
regulations on the supply of services within its territory to achieve legitimate policy
objectives.

2. Each Party shall ensure that a measure of general application affecting trade in
services 1s administered in a reasonable, objective, and impartial manner.

3. Additional commitments on the development and administration of measures are
set out in Annex 8-A (Development and Administration of Measures).

Article 8.10: Recognition

1. For the purposes of the fulfilment, in whole or in part, of a Party’s standards or
criteria for the authorisation, licensing, or certification of a service supplier, and subject
to the requirements of paragraph 4, a Party may recognise the education or experience
obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted in a particular country.
This recognition, which may be achieved through harmonisation or otherwise, may be
based upon an agreement or arrangement with the country concerned, or may be accorded
autonomously.

2. If a Party recognises, autonomously, or by agreement or arrangement, the
education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted
in the territory of a non-Party, Article 8.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) is not to be
construed to require the Party to accord recognition to the education or experience
obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted in the territory of the
other Party.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to publish, by electronic means, relevant information,
including appropriate descriptions, concerning an agreement or arrangement of the type
referred to in paragraph | that the Party or relevant bodies or authorities in its territory
have concluded.

4. A Party that is party to an agreement or arrangement of the type referred to in
paragraph 1, whether existing or future, shall afford adequate opportunity for the other
Party, if the other Party is interested, to negotiate accession to that agreement or
arrangement or to negotiate a comparable one with that other Party. If a Party accords
recognition autonomously, it shall afford adequate opportunity for the other Party to
demonstrate that education, experience, licences, or certifications obtained, or
requirements met in that other Party’s territory should be recognised.

5. A Party shall not accord recognition in a manner that would constitute a means of
discrimination in the application of its standards or criteria for the authorisation,
certification, or licensing of a service supplier, or a disguised restriction on trade in
services.

6. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that recognition does not require citizenship
or any form of residency, or education, experience, or training in the territory of the host
jurisdiction.

7. As set out in Annex 8-B (Professional Services), the Parties shall endeavour to
facilitate trade in professional services including through the establishment of a
Professional Services Working Group.

Article 8.11: Denial of Benefits

1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of the other
Party if the service supplier is an enterprise owned or controlled by a person of a non-
Party, and the denying Party adopts or maintains a measure with respect to the non-Party
or a person of the non-Party that prohibits transactions with that enterprise or that would
be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to that
enterprise.

2. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of the other
Party if the service supplier is an enterprise owned or controlled by a person of a non-
Party, or by a person of the denying Party, that has no substantial business activities in
the territory of the other Party.

Article 8.12: Payments and Transfers

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers and payments that relate to the supply of a
service to be made freely and without delay into and out of its territory.

2. Each Party shall permit transfers and payments that relate to the supply of a
service to be made in a freely convertible currency at the market rate of exchange that
prevails at the time of transfer.
3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent or delay a transfer or
payment through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith application of its laws
that relate to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency, or the protection of the rights of creditors;

(b) issuing, trading, or dealing in securities and derivatives;

(c) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist
law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;

(d) criminal or penal offences; or

(e) ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or administrative
proceedings.
4. For greater certainty, this Article does not preclude the equitable,

non-discriminatory, and good faith application of a Party’s laws relating to its social
security, public retirement, or compulsory savings programs.

Article 8.13: Review

The Parties shall, three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement
but no later than five years, and every three years thereafter, unless otherwise agreed,
hold consultations to review their respective non-conforming measures referred to in
paragraphs | and 2 of Article 8.7 (Reservations). The Parties shall, without prejudice to
the result, hold these consultations with a view to increasing the conformity of these
non-conforming measures with this Agreement.

8-8

Article 8.14: Committee on Trade in Services

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade in Services consisting of
representatives of the Parties.

2. The functions of the Committee on Trade in Services’ are to:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

review the implementation of this Chapter;

consider any other matters related to this Chapter identified by either
Party;

consider matters related to Chapter 11 (Telecommunications), as well as
activities of the Professional Services Working Group;

advance issues and reports at the request of the Working Group on the
Temporary Movement of Natural Persons, established under Article 9.6.1
(Temporary Movement of Natural Persons — Working Group on the
Temporary Movement of Natural Persons), to the Joint Committee,
established under Article 23.1 (Administrative and Institutional
Provisions — Establishment of the Joint Committee);

discuss and coordinate with the Committee on Investment, established
under Article 13.20.1 (Investment — Committee on Investment), on matters
related to this Chapter and Chapter 13 (Investment), and non-conforming
measures pursuant to Article 8.7 (Reservations); and

report to the Joint Committee as required.

8-9

CHAPTER 9

TEMPORARY MOVEMENT OF NATURAL PERSONS

Article 9.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

business person means a natural person of a Party who is engaged in the trade of goods,
the supply of services or the conduct of investment activities;

immigration formality means:

(a) For Indonesia, a visa, permit, pass, or other document, or electronic
authority, granting temporary entry;

(b) For Canada, a permit authorising work;

temporary entry means entry into the territory of a Party by a business person of the
other Party without the intent to establish permanent residence; and

immigration measure means any measure affecting the entry and stay of foreign
nationals.

Article 9.2: Scope

1. This Chapter applies to measures affecting the temporary entry of business
persons of a Party into the territory of the other Party under the categories set out in each
Party’s Schedule of Commitments for Temporary Movement of Natural Persons at
Annex 9-A (Schedule of the Parties).

2. This Chapter does not apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking access
to the employment market of the other Party, nor does it apply to measures regarding
citizenship, nationality, residence, or employment on a permanent basis.

3. This Agreement does not prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the
entry of natural persons of the other Party into, or their temporary stay in, its territory,
including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly
movement of natural persons across, its borders, provided that such measures are not
applied in a manner that nullifies or impairs the benefits accruing to the other Party under
this Chapter.

Article 9.3: Grant of Temporary Entry

1. Each Party shall grant temporary entry to a business person of the other Party,
who is otherwise qualified for entry under its immigration measures, including measures
relating to public health and safety and national security, in accordance with this Chapter
and each Party’s Schedule of Commitments for Temporary Movement of Natural Persons
at Annex 9-A (Schedule of the Parties).

9-1]

2. A Party may refuse to grant temporary entry or issue an immigration formality to
a business person of the other Party if the temporary entry of that business person might
adversely affect:

(a) the settlement of any labour dispute that is in progress at the intended
place of employment; or

(b) — the employment of any natural person who is involved in such dispute.

3. A Party may require a business person seeking temporary entry under this Chapter
to obtain an entry visa or an equivalent requirement, prior to temporarily entering,
working, or establishing a commercial presence, in accordance with its laws and
regulations. The sole fact that a Party requires a business person of the other Party to
obtain an entry visa, or an equivalent requirement prior to temporarily entering, working,
or establishing a commercial presence, shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing
the benefits accruing to the other Party under this Chapter.

4. The sole fact that a Party grants temporary entry or issues an immigration
formality to a business person of the other Party pursuant to this Chapter does not exempt
that business person from meeting any applicable licensing or other requirements,
including any mandatory codes of conduct, to practise a profession or otherwise engage
in business activities.

Article 9.4: Application Procedures

1. Each Party shall, as expeditiously as possible following receipt of a complete
application for an immigration formality, issue its decision to the applicant. If approved,
the decision shall specify the period of stay and other conditions.

2. At the request of an applicant, the Party that has received a complete application
for an immigration formality, shall endeavour to promptly provide information
concerning the status of the application, either directly or through their authorised
representative.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to accept and process applications for an immigration
formality in electronic format.

4. In accordance with its laws and regulations, any fee imposed by a Party in respect
of the processing of an immigration formality shall be reasonable in that it does not, in
itself, represent an unjustifiable impediment to the movement of natural persons of the
other Party under this Chapter.

5. Nothing in this Chapter impairs the ability of an applicant to apply for temporary
entry or an immigration formality through the domestic regime of a Party.

Article 9.5: Provision of Information

Further to Article 22.2 (Transparency, Anti-Corruption, and Responsible Business
Conduct — Publication), each Party shall promptly after the date of entry into force of this
Agreement:

(a) publish online if possible, or otherwise make publicly available,
explanatory material on its measures relating to this Chapter; and

(b) establish or maintain appropriate mechanisms to respond to enquiries from
interested persons regarding measures relating to temporary entry covered
by this Chapter.

Article 9.6: Working Group on the Temporary Movement of Natural Persons

1. The Parties hereby establish a Working Group on the Temporary Movement of
Natural Persons (“Working Group”) composed of government representatives of each
Party, including representatives of competent authorities.' These competent authorities
act as each Party’s Contact Point for matters pertaining to this Chapter.

2. The Working Group shall meet as required to exchange information as described
in Article 9.5 (Provision of Information) and to consider matters pertaining to this
Chapter, such as:

(a) the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) the development of common criteria and interpretation for the
implementation of this Chapter;

(c) the development of measures to further facilitate temporary entry of
business persons; and

(d) proposed modification to this Chapter.

3. The Working Group shall report through the Trade in Services Committee,
established under Article 8.14 (Trade in Services - Committee on Trade in Services).

Article 9.7: Dispute Settlement

1. The Parties shall endeavour to settle any difference arising out of the
implementation of this Chapter through consultations between Contact Points.

' For greater certainty, competent authorities for Indonesia refers to the Directorate General of Immigration, Ministry of
Immigration and Correction, the Directorate General of Manpower Placement Development and Employment
Opportunities Expansion, Ministry of Manpower, and the Directorate of Trade in Services Negotiation, Ministry of
Trade. For greater certainty, competent authorities for Canada refers to the Director General of the Temporary Workers
Branch, at Citizenship and Immigration Canada.

9-3

2. A Party may not initiate proceedings under Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement)
regarding a refusal to grant temporary entry to business persons under this Chapter
unless:

(a) the matter involves a pattern of practice;

(b) the business person who has been refused temporary entry has exhausted
the applicable administrative remedies; and

(c) the Contact Points have been unable to resolve the issue.

3. The administrative remedies referred to in subparagraph (2)(b) shall be deemed to
have been exhausted if a final determination in the matter has not been issued by the
competent authority within a reasonable period of time after the date of the institution of
an administrative proceeding, and the failure to issue a determination is not attributable to
delay caused by the business person.

Article 9.8: Relation to Other Chapters
1. This Agreement does not impose an obligation on a Party regarding its
immigration measures, except as specifically provided in this Chapter or Chapter 22

(Transparency, Anti-Corruption, and Responsible Business Conduct).

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose obligations or commitments
with respect to other Chapters of this Agreement.

Article 9.9: Cooperation

The Parties may discuss mutually agreed areas of cooperation to further facilitate
the temporary entry and temporary stay of natural persons of the other Parties, including:

(a) upon request of a Party, subject to its domestic laws regarding protection
of personal data and other relevant laws and regulations, exchanging
information on statistical data respecting the granting of temporary entry
for business persons covered by this chapter of the other Party; and

(b) establishing a dialogue on collecting and maintaining statistical data.

9-4

CHAPTER 10

FINANCIAL SERVICES

Article 10.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
covered person means:
(a) a financial institution of the other Party; or
(b) a cross-border financial service supplier of the other Party that is subject to
regulation, supervision, and licensing, authorisation, or registration by a

financial regulatory authority of the Party;

cross-border financial service supplier of a Party means a person of a Party that is
engaged in the business of supplying a financial service within the territory of the Party
and that seeks to supply or supplies a financial service through the cross-border supply of
that service;

cross-border trade in financial services or cross-border supply of financial
services means the supply of a financial service:

(a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party;
(b) in the territory of a Party to a person of the other Party; or
(c) by a national! of a Party in the territory of the other Party,

but does not include the supply of a financial service in the territory of a Party by an
investment in that territory;

financial institution means a financial intermediary or other enterprise that is authorised
to do business and regulated or supervised as a financial institution under the law of the
Party in whose territory it is located;

financial institution of the other Party means a financial institution, including a branch,
located in the territory of a Party that is controlled by a person of the other Party;

financial service means a service of a financial nature. A financial service includes all
insurance and insurance-related services, all banking and other financial services
(excluding insurance), and services incidental or auxiliary to a service of a financial
nature. Financial services include the following activities:

Insurance and insurance-related services
(a) direct insurance (including co-insurance):
(1) life;
(11) non-life;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession;

' For the purposes of the use of the term “national” throughout this Chapter, a natural person who is a dual citizen shall
be deemed to be exclusively a national of the Party of his or her dominant and effective nationality.

10-1

(c)
(d)

insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency; and

services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, actuarial, risk
assessment, and claim settlement services;

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

(e)
(f)

(g)
(h)

(j)

(k)

(1)
(m)

(n)

(0)

acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public;

lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage credit, factoring,
and financing of commercial transactions;

financial leasing;

all payment and money transmission services, including credit, charge and
debit cards, travellers cheques, and bankers drafts;

guarantees and commitments;

trading for own account or for account of customers, whether on an
exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, the following:

(1) money market instruments (including cheques, bills, certificates of
deposits);

(11) foreign exchange;
(111) | derivative products, including futures and options;

(iv) | exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including products
such as swaps, and forward rate agreements;

(v) transferable securities; and

(vi) other negotiable instruments and financial assets, including
bullion;

participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and
placement as agent (whether publicly or privately) and provision of
services related to such issues;

money broking;

asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all forms of
collective investment management, pension fund management, custodial,
depository and trust services;

settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities,
derivative products, and other negotiable instruments;

provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data

processing and related software by suppliers of other financial
services; and

10-2

(p) advisory, intermediation, and other auxiliary financial services on all the
activities listed in subparagraphs (e) through (0), including credit reference
and analysis, investment and portfolio research and advice, advice on
acquisitions and on corporate restructuring and strategy;

financial service supplier of a Party means a person of a Party that is engaged in the
business of supplying a financial service within the territory of that Party;

investment means “investment” as defined in Article 13.1 (Investment — Definitions),
except that, with respect to “a loan to an enterprise” and a “debt instrument of an
enterprise” referred to in that Article:

(a) a loan to or debt instrument issued by a financial institution is an
investment only if it is treated as regulatory capital by the Party in whose
territory the financial institution is located; and

(b) a loan granted by or debt instrument owned by a financial institution, other
than a loan to or debt instrument issued by a financial institution referred
to in subparagraph (a), is not an investment;

for greater certainty, a loan granted by or debt instrument owned by a cross-border
financial service supplier of a Party, other than a loan to or debt instrument issued by a
financial institution, is an investment for the purposes of Chapter 13 (Investment), if that
loan or debt instrument meets the criteria for investments set out in Article 13.1
(Investment — Definitions);

investor of a Party means a Party, or a person of a Party, that seeks to make’, is making,
or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party. For the purposes of this
definition, a “person of a Party” that is an enterprise of a Party means:

(a) an enterprise that is constituted or organised under the law of that Party
and that has substantial business activities in the territory of that Party. A
determination of whether an enterprise has substantial business activities
in the territory of a Party requires a case-by-case, fact-based inquiry; or

(b) an enterprise that is constituted or organised under the law of that Party,
and is directly or indirectly owned or controlled by a national of that Party
or by an enterprise mentioned under subparagraph (a);

new financial service means a financial service not supplied in the Party’s territory that
is supplied by a financial institution within the territory of the other Party, and includes
any new form of delivery of a financial service or the sale of a financial product that is
not sold in the Party’s territory;

person of a Party means a national of a Party or an enterprise of a Party and, for greater
certainty, does not include a branch of an enterprise of a non-Party;

> For greater certainty, the Parties understand that, for the purposes of the definition of “investor of a Party”, an investor
“seeks to make” an investment when that investor has taken concrete actions to make an investment. Where a
notification or approval process is required for making an investment, an investor that “seeks to make” an investment
refers to an investor of the other Party that has initiated such notification or approval process.

10-3

public entity means a government, a central bank or monetary authority, or a financial
services authority’ of a Party, or any financial institution that is owned or controlled by a
Party; and

self-regulatory organisation means any non-governmental body, including any
securities or futures exchange or market, clearing agency, or other organisation or
association, that exercises regulatory or supervisory authority over financial service
suppliers or financial institutions by statute or delegation from a Party’s financial
regulatory authorities.

Article 10.2: Scope
1. This Chapter applies to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
(a) a financial institution of the other Party;

(b) an investor of the other Party, and an investment of that investor, in a
financial institution in the Party’s territory; and

(c) cross-border trade in financial services.

2. Chapter 8 (Trade in Services) and Chapter 13 (Investment) apply to a measure
described in paragraph | only to the extent that those Chapters are incorporated into this
Chapter.

(a) Article 8.11 (Trade in Services — Denial of Benefits), Article 13.4
(Investment — Right to Regulate), Article 13.5 (Investment — Regulatory
Objectives), Article 13.8 (Investment — Treatment in Case of Armed
Conflict or Civil Strife), Article 13.9 (Investment — Minimum Standard of
Treatment), Article 13.10 (Investment — Expropriation), Article 13.11
(Investment — Transfer of Funds), Article 13.15 (Investment — Denial of
Benefits), Article 13.16 (Investment — Special Formalities and Information
Requirements), and Article 13.21 (Investment — Exclusions) are
incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter.

(b) Section D (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) of Chapter 13 (Investment)
is incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter solely for claims that a
Party has breached Article 13.8 (Investment — Treatment in Case of
Armed Conflict or Civil Strife), Article 13.10 (Investment —
Expropriation), Article 13.11 (Investment — Transfer of Funds), Article
13.15 (investment — Denial of Benefits), and Article 13.16 (Investment —
Special Formalities and Information Requirements), as incorporated into
this Chapter under subparagraph (a).4

(c) Article 8.12 (Trade in Services — Payments and Transfers) is incorporated
into and made a part of this Chapter to the extent that cross-border trade in
financial services is subject to obligations pursuant to Article 10.6
(Cross-Border Trade).

3 The Parties confirm their understanding that, in the case of Indonesia, for the purposes of this definition, “financial
services authority” refers to Otoritas Jasa Keuangan, or its successors.

4 For greater certainty, Section D (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) of Chapter 13 (Investment) does not apply to
cross-border trade in financial services.

10-4

3. This Chapter does not apply to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party
relating to:

(a) an activity or a service forming part of a public retirement plan or
statutory system of social security; or

(b) an activity or service conducted for the account or with the guarantee or
using the financial resources of the Party, including its public entities,

except that this Chapter applies to the extent that a Party allows an activity or
service referred to in subparagraph (a) or (b) to be conducted by its financial
institutions in competition with a public entity or a financial institution.

4. This Chapter does not apply to government procurement of financial services.

5. This Chapter does not apply to a subsidy or grant, including a government-
supported loan, guarantee, and insurance, with respect to the cross-border supply of
financial services.

Article 10.3: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to an investor of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with respect to
the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or
other disposition of financial institutions and investments in financial institutions in its
territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to a financial institution of the other Party, and to an
investment of an investor of the other Party in a financial institution, treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own financial institutions, and
to investments of its own investors in financial institutions with respect to the
establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other
disposition of financial institutions and investments.

3. For the purposes of the national treatment obligation in Article 10.6.1
(Cross-Border Trade), a Party shall accord to a cross-border financial service supplier of
the other Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to
its own financial service suppliers with respect to the supply of the relevant service.

4. The treatment accorded by a Party under paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 means, with
respect to a government other than at the central level, treatment accorded, in like
circumstances, by that government to financial institutions of the Party, investors of the
Party in financial institutions, and investments of those investors in financial institutions,
of the Party of which it forms a part.

5. For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances”
depends on the totality of the circumstances, including whether the relevant treatment
distinguishes between investors in financial institutions, investments in financial
institutions, financial institutions, financial services, or financial service suppliers on the
basis of legitimate public policy objectives.

10-5

6. Paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 prohibit discrimination based on nationality. A difference
in treatment accorded to an investor of the other Party in a financial institution, that
investor’s investment in a financial institution, or a financial institution of the other Party
and a Party’s own investors in financial institutions, investments of its own investors in
financial institutions, or its own financial institutions, does not, in and of itself, establish
discrimination based on nationality.

Article 10.4: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment
1. Each Party shall accord to:

(a) an investor of the other Party, treatment no less favourable than that it
accords, in like circumstances, to investors of a non-Party;

(b) a financial institution of the other Party, treatment no less favourable than
that it accords, in like circumstances, to financial institutions of
a non-Party;

(c) an investment of an investor of the other Party in a financial institution,
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to
investments of investors of a non-Party in financial institutions; and

(d) a cross-border financial service supplier of the other Party, treatment no
less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to cross-border
financial service suppliers of a non-Party.

2. The treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means, with respect to
a government other than at the central level, treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by
that government to financial institutions of a non-Party, investors of a non-Party in
financial institutions, and investments of those investors in financial institutions, or
financial services or cross-border financial service suppliers of a non-Party.

3. The “treatment” referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 does not include procedures or
mechanisms for the resolution of investment disputes between investors and States
provided for in other international investment treaties and other trade agreements.

4. Substantive obligations in other international investment treaties and other trade
agreements do not in themselves constitute “treatment”, and thus cannot give rise to a
breach of this Article, in the absence of measures adopted or maintained by a Party
pursuant to those obligations.

5. For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under
this Article depends on the totality of the circumstances, including whether the relevant
treatment distinguishes between investors in financial institutions, investments in
financial institutions, financial institutions, financial services, or financial service
suppliers on the basis of legitimate public policy objectives.

10-6

6. Paragraph 1 prohibits discrimination based on nationality. A difference in
treatment accorded to an investor of the other Party in a financial institution, that
investor’s investment in a financial institution, or a financial institution of the other Party
and a non-Party’s investors in financial institutions, investments of a non-Party’s
investors in financial institutions, or a non-Party’s financial institutions, does not, in and
of itself, establish discrimination based on nationality.

Article 10.5: Market Access for Financial Institutions>

A Party shall not adopt or maintain with respect to a financial institution of the
other Party or an investor of the other Party seeking to establish a financial institution,
either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory, a
measure that:

(a) imposes a limitation on:

(1) the number of financial institutions whether in the form of
numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers, or the
requirement of an economic needs test;

(11) the total value of financial service transactions or assets in the form
of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(111) | the total number of financial service operations or the total quantity
of financial services output expressed in terms of designated
numerical units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an
economic needs test;°

(iv) the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a
particular financial service sector or that a financial institution may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the
supply of a specific financial service in the form of numerical
quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; or

(b) restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint venture through
which a financial institution may supply a service.

Article 10.6: Cross-Border Trade

1. Each Party shall permit, under terms and conditions that accord national
treatment, a cross-border financial service supplier of the other Party to supply the
financial services specified in Annex 10-A (Cross-Border Trade).

> For the purposes of a Party’s reservations pursuant to Article 10.10.1 and 10.10.2 (Non-Conforming Measures), a
limitation on the participation of foreign capital by way of a maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the
total value of individual or aggregate foreign investment is reserved against Article 10.3 (National Treatment) to the
extent a limitation is inconsistent with that Article.

6 Subparagraph (a)(iii) does not cover a measure of a Party that limits inputs for the supply of financial services.

10-7

2. Article 10.5 (Market Access for Financial Institutions) applies to the treatment of
a cross-border financial service supplier of the other Party supplying the financial
services specified in Annex 10-A (Cross-Border Trade). For the purposes of this Article,
a measure that a Party “shall not adopt or maintain with respect to a financial institution
of the other Party or an investor of the other Party” under Article 10.5 (Market Access for
Financial Institutions) refers to a measure relating to a cross-border financial service
supplier of the other Party supplying the financial services specified in Annex 10-A
(Cross-Border Trade).

3. Each Party shall permit persons located in its territory, and its nationals wherever
located, to purchase financial services from a cross-border financial service supplier of
the other Party located in the territory of the other Party. This obligation does not require
a Party to permit a cross-border financial service supplier of the other Party to do
business or solicit in its territory. Each Party may define “doing business” and
“solicitation” for the purposes of this obligation provided that those definitions are not
inconsistent with paragraph 1.

4. Without prejudice to other means of prudential regulation of cross-border trade in
financial services, a Party may require the registration or authorisation of a cross-border
financial service supplier of the other Party and of a financial instrument.

Article 10.7: New Financial Services’

Each Party shall permit a financial institution of the other Party to supply a new
financial service that the Party would permit its own financial institutions, in like
circumstances, to supply without adopting a law or modifying an existing
law. Notwithstanding Article 10.5(b) (Market Access for Financial Institutions), a Party
may determine the institutional and juridical form through which the new financial
service may be supplied and may require authorisation for the supply of the service. If a
Party requires a financial institution to obtain authorisation to supply a new financial
service, the Party shall decide within a reasonable period of time whether to issue the
authorisation and may refuse the authorisation for prudential reasons, but not solely for
the reason that the service is not supplied by any financial institution in its territory.

Article 10.8: Treatment of Customer Information

This Chapter does not require a Party to disclose information related to the
financial affairs and accounts of individual customers of financial institutions or
cross-border financial service suppliers.

’ The Parties understand that nothing in this Article prevents a financial institution of a Party from applying to the other
Party to request that it authorise the supply of a financial service that is not supplied in the territory of either Party. That
application shall be subject to the law of the Party to which the application is made and, for greater certainty, shall not
be subject to this Article.

8 For greater certainty, a Party may issue a new regulation or other subordinate measure in permitting the supply of the
new financial service.

10-8

Article 10.9: Senior Management and Boards of Directors

1. A Party shall not require a financial institution of the other Party to engage a
natural person of a particular nationality as senior managerial or other essential
personnel.

2. A Party shall not require that more than a simple majority of the board of
directors of a financial institution of the other Party be composed of nationals of the
Party, persons residing in the territory of the Party, or a combination thereof.

3. A Party should encourage financial institutions to consider greater diversity in
senior management positions or on their board of directors, which may include a
requirement to nominate women.

Article 10.10: Non-Conforming Measures

1. Article 10.3 (National Treatment), Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment), Article 10.5 (Market Access for Financial Institutions), Article 10.6
(Cross-Border Trade), and Article 10.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors) do
not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at:

(1) the central level of government, as set out by that Party in Section
A of its Schedule to Annex III;

(11) a regional level of government, as set out by that Party in Section
A of its Schedule to Annex III; or

(i111) | a government other than the central or regional levels.

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure
referred to in subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a) to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the
conformity of the measure as it existed:

(1) immediately before the amendment with Article 10.3 (National
Treatment), Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment),
Article 10.5 (Market Access for Financial Institutions), or
Article 10.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors); ’ or

(11) on the date of entry into force of this Agreement for the Party
applying the non-conforming measure, with Article 10.6
(Cross-Border Trade).

2. Article 10.3 (National Treatment), Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment), Article 10.5 (Market Access for Financial Institutions), Article 10.6
(Cross-Border Trade), and Article 10.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors) do
not apply to a measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to a sector, subsector,
or an activity, as set out by that Party in Section B of its Schedule to Annex III.

° For Indonesia, Annex 10-B (Transition for the Application of Article 10.10.1(c)(i) (Non-Conforming Measures)),
applies.

10-9

3. A non-conforming measure, set out in a Party’s Schedule to Annex I-A, I-B, or II
as not subject to Article 13.6 (Investment — National Treatment), Article 13.7
(Investment — Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 13.13 (Investment — Senior
Management and Boards of Directors), Article 8.3 (Trade in Services — National
Treatment), or Article 8.4 (Trade in Services — Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), shall
be treated as a non-conforming measure not subject to Article 10.3 (National Treatment),
Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) or Article 10.9 (Senior Management and
Boards of Directors), as the case may be, to the extent that the measure, sector, subsector,
or activity set out in the entry is covered by this Chapter.

4. In respect of intellectual property rights, a Party may derogate from Article 10.3
(National Treatment) and Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) in a manner
that is consistent with:

(a) Article 14.10 (Intellectual Property — National Treatment);

(b) the TRIPS Agreement, if the derogation relates to matters not addressed
by Chapter 14 (Intellectual Property); or

(c) an amendment of or waiver to the TRIPS Agreement in force for both
Parties.

5. Within three years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, Section A of
Indonesia’s Schedule to Annex III shall be amended in accordance with Article 26.2
(Final Provisions — Amendments) to include all non-conforming measures not otherwise
listed in Section A of its Schedule to Annex III on the date of signature of this Agreement
provided that any such amendment shall:

(a) be limited to a measure that was non-conforming on December 1, 2024;
and

(b) not be any less favourable than Indonesia’s commitments in respect of
financial services under an international trade agreement providing market
access for financial services in force prior to the signing of this
Agreement, except those committed among ASEAN Member States under
the framework of the ASEAN Economic Community.

10-10

Article 10.11: Exceptions

1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter and Agreement except for
Chapter 2 (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods), Chapter 3 (Rules of
Origin and Origin Procedures), Chapter 4 (Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation),
Chapter 5 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), Chapter 6 (Technical Barriers to
Trade), and Chapter 7 (Trade Remedies), a Party shall not be prevented from adopting or
maintaining a measure for prudential reasons,'° |! including for the protection of
investors, depositors, policy holders, or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed by a
financial institution or cross-border financial service supplier or to ensure the integrity
and stability of the financial system. If the measure does not conform with the provisions
of this Agreement to which this exception applies, the measure shall not be used as a
means of avoiding the Party’s commitments or obligations under those provisions.

2. Nothing in this Chapter, Chapter 8 (Trade in Services), Chapter 11
(Telecommunications) including specifically Article 11.22 (Telecommunications —
Relation to Other Chapters), Chapter 12 (Electronic Commerce), or Chapter 13
(Investment), applies to a non-discriminatory measure of general application taken by a
central bank or monetary authority, or a financial services authority!”, of a Party, in
pursuit of monetary and related credit policies or exchange rate policies. This paragraph
does not affect a Party’s obligations under Article 13.11 (Investment — Transfer of Funds)
or Article 8.12 (Trade in Services — Payments and Transfers).

3. Notwithstanding Article 8.12 (Trade in Services — Payments and Transfers) and
Article 13.11 (Investment — Transfer of Funds), as incorporated into this Chapter, a Party
may prevent or limit a transfer by a financial institution or a cross-border financial
service supplier to, or for the benefit of, an affiliate of or person related to that institution
or supplier, through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith application of a
measure relating to maintenance of the safety, soundness, integrity, or financial
responsibility of a financial institution or a cross-border financial service supplier. This
paragraph does not prejudice any other provision of this Agreement that permits a Party
to restrict transfers.

'0 The Parties understand that the term “prudential reasons” includes the maintenance of the safety, soundness,
integrity, security, or financial responsibility of individual financial institutions or cross-border financial service
suppliers, the safety, security, and financial and operational integrity of payment and clearing systems, and addressing
threats to the integrity and security of financial institutions or cross-border financial service suppliers, including threats
arising from foreign interference.

"! For greater certainty, if a measure challenged under Section D of Chapter 13 (Investment) is determined to have been
adopted or maintained by a Party for prudential reasons in accordance with procedures in Article 10.24 (Investment
Disputes in Financial Services), a tribunal shall find that the measure is not inconsistent with the Party’s obligations in
this Agreement and accordingly shall not award any damages with respect to that measure.

2 The Parties confirm their understanding that, in the case of Indonesia, for the purposes of this Article, “financial
services authority” refers to Otoritas Jasa Keuangan, or its successors.

10-11

4. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party
from adopting or enforcing a measure necessary to secure compliance with laws or
regulations that are not inconsistent with this Chapter, including those relating to the
prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with the effects of a default on
financial services contracts, subject to the requirement that the measure is not applied in a
manner that would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between
countries where like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on investment in
financial institutions or cross-border trade in financial services as covered by this
Chapter.

Article 10.12: Recognition

1. A Party may recognise a prudential measure of a non-Party in the application of a
measure covered by this Chapter. That recognition may be:

(a) accorded autonomously;
(b) achieved through harmonisation or other means; or
(c) based upon an agreement or arrangement with the non-Party.

2. A Party that accords recognition of prudential measures under paragraph 1(a)
or (b) shall provide adequate opportunity to the other Party to demonstrate that
circumstances exist in which there are or would be equivalent regulation, oversight,
implementation of regulation, and, if appropriate, procedures concerning the sharing of
information between the Parties.

3. If a Party accords recognition of prudential measures under paragraph 1(c) and the
circumstances set out in paragraph 2 exist, that Party shall provide adequate opportunity
to the other Party to negotiate accession to the agreement or arrangement, or to negotiate
a comparable agreement or arrangement.

4. For greater certainty, nothing in Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment)
requires a Party to accord recognition to prudential measures of the other Party.

Article 10.13: Transparency

1. Annex 8-A (Development and Administration of Measures), Chapter 21 (Good
Regulatory Practices and Regulatory Cooperation), and Section B (Transparency) of
Chapter 22 (Transparency, Anti-Corruption, and Responsible Business Conduct) do not
apply to a measure relating to this Chapter.

2. The Parties recognise that transparent regulations and policies governing the
activities of financial institutions and cross-border financial service suppliers are
important in facilitating their ability to gain access to and operate in each other’s markets.
Each Party commits to promote regulatory transparency in financial services.

3. Each Party shall ensure that all measures of general application to which this
Chapter applies are administered in a reasonable, objective, and impartial manner.

10-12

4. Each Party shall, to the extent practicable:

(a) publish in advance any regulation that it proposes to adopt and the purpose
of the regulation; and

(b) provide interested persons and the other Party with a reasonable
opportunity to comment on that proposed regulation.

5. At the time that it adopts a final regulation, a Party should, to the extent
practicable and in a manner consistent with its legal system or practice for adopting
measures, address in writing the substantive comments received from interested persons
with respect to the proposed regulation. '°

6. To the extent practicable, each Party should allow a reasonable period of time
between publication of a final regulation of general application and the date when it
enters into effect.

7. Each Party shall ensure that the rules of general application adopted or maintained
by a self-regulatory organisation of the Party are promptly published or otherwise made
available in a manner that enables interested persons to become acquainted with them.

8. Each Party shall maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms for responding to
inquiries from interested persons regarding measures of general application covered by
this Chapter.

Article 10.14 Processing of Applications

1. If a Party requires authorisation for the supply of a financial service, it shall
ensure that its financial regulatory authorities:

(a) to the extent practicable, permit an applicant to submit an application at
any time throughout the year;"4

(b) allow a reasonable period for the submission of an application if specific
time periods for applications exist;

(c) provide to service suppliers and persons seeking to supply a service the
information necessary to comply with the requirements and procedures for
obtaining, maintaining, amending, and renewing that authorisation;

(d) to the extent practicable, provide an indicative timeframe for the
processing of an application;

(e) at the request of the applicant, provide without undue delay information
concerning the status of the application;

(f) endeavour to accept applications in electronic format;

(g) accept copies of documents that are authenticated in accordance with the
Party’s laws and regulations, in place of original documents, unless the
financial regulatory authority requires original documents to protect the
integrity of the authorisation process;

'3 For greater certainty, a Party may address those comments collectively on an official government website.

'4 A financial regulatory authority is not required to start considering an application outside of its official working
hours and working days.

10-13

(h) in the case of an application considered complete under the Party’s laws
and regulations!°, within a reasonable period of time and taking into
account the available resources of the financial regulatory authority, after
the submission of the application, ensure that:

(1) the processing of an application is completed; and

(11) the applicant is informed of the decision concerning the
application, to the extent possible in writing;!°

(1) in the case of an application considered incomplete under the Party’s laws
and regulations, within a reasonable period of time and taking into account
the available resources of the financial regulatory authority, to the extent
practicable:

(1) inform the applicant that the application is incomplete;

(11) | at the request of the applicant, identify the additional information
required to complete the application and provide guidance on why
the application is considered incomplete; and

(111) | provide the applicant with the opportunity to provide the additional
information that is required to complete the application;'’

however, if none of the above is practicable, and the application is rejected
due to incompleteness, ensure that the applicant is informed within a
reasonable period of time;

(j) if an application is rejected, to the extent practicable, either upon the
financial regulatory authority’s own initiative or upon request of the
applicant, inform the applicant of the reasons for rejection and, if
applicable, the procedures for resubmission of an application. An
applicant should not be prevented from submitting another application
solely on the basis that an application has been previously rejected;'* and

(k) ensure that authorisation, once granted, enters into effect without undue
delay, subject to applicable terms and conditions.'?

2. Each Party shall ensure, with respect to an authorisation fee charged by a financial
regulatory authority, that the financial regulatory authority provides an applicant with a
schedule of fees or information on how fee amounts are calculated, and that it does not
use the fees as a means of avoiding the Party’s commitments or obligations under this
Chapter.”°

'S A financial regulatory authority may require that all information in an application is submitted in a specific format to
consider it complete for processing.

16 “Tn writing” may include in electronic form.

'” For greater certainty, this opportunity does not require a financial regulatory authority to provide an extension of a
deadline.

'8 A financial regulatory authority may require that the content of this application be revised.
'9 A financial regulatory authority is not responsible for delay due to reasons outside of its competence.

20 An authorisation fee does not include a fee for the use of natural resources, payments for auction, tendering, or other
non-discriminatory means of awarding concessions, or mandated contributions to universal service provision.

10-14

3. If a Party adopts or maintains a measure with respect to an authorisation
requirement or procedure for the supply of a financial service, it shall ensure that:

(a) the financial regulatory authority reaches and administers its decisions in a
manner independent from any supplier of the service for which
authorisation is required;”!

(b) such a measure is based on objective and transparent criteria;””

(c) the procedure is impartial, and that the procedure is adequate for an
applicant to demonstrate whether it meets the requirement, if such
requirement exists; and

(d) the procedure does not in itself unjustifiably prevent fulfilment of a
requirement.

Article 10.15: Self-Regulatory Organisations

If a Party requires a financial institution or a cross-border financial service
supplier of the other Party to be a member of, participate in, or have access to, a
self-regulatory organisation in order to provide a financial service in or into its territory,
it shall ensure that the self-regulatory organisation observes the obligations under
Article 10.3 (National Treatment) and Article 10.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment).

Article 10.16: Payment and Clearing Systems”

Under terms and conditions that accord national treatment, each Party shall grant
a financial institution of the other Party established in its territory access to payment and
clearing systems operated by public entities, and to official funding and refinancing
facilities available in the normal course of ordinary business. This Article is not intended
to confer access to the Party’s lender of last resort facilities.

Article 10.17: Expedited Availability of Insurance Services

The Parties recognise the importance of maintaining and developing regulatory
procedures to expedite the offering of insurance services by licensed suppliers. If a Party
maintains regulatory product approval procedures, that Party shall endeavour to maintain
or improve those procedures.

*1 This provision does not mandate a particular administrative structure; it refers to the decision-making process and
administering of decisions.

>? Criteria may include, among other things, competence and the ability to supply a service, including to do so in a
manner consistent with a Party’s regulatory requirements. A financial regulatory authority may assess the weight to be
given to each criterion.

>3 For greater certainty, a Party need not grant access under this Article to a financial institution of the other Party
established in its territory if this access is not granted in like circumstances to its own financial institutions.

10-15

Article 10.18: Performance of Back-Office Functions

1. The Parties recognise that the performance of the back-office functions of a
financial institution in its territory by the head office or an affiliate of the financial
institution, or by an unrelated service supplier, either inside or outside its territory, is
important to the effective management and efficient operation of that financial institution.
While a Party may require a financial institution to ensure compliance with any domestic
requirements applicable to those functions, the Parties recognise the importance of
avoiding the imposition of arbitrary requirements on the performance of those functions.

2. For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph | alters any other provision of this
Agreement or prevents a Party from requiring a financial institution in its territory to
retain certain back-office functions in that territory.

Article 10.19: Transfer of Information

Each Party shall allow a covered person to transfer information in electronic or
other form, into and out of its territory, for data processing if the processing is required as
part of the covered person’s ordinary course of business. Nothing in this Article restricts
the right of a Party to adopt or maintain a measure to:

(a) protect personal data, personal privacy, or the confidentiality of individual
records and accounts;

(b) require a financial institution to comply with a measure related to data
management; or

(c) require a financial institution to obtain prior authorisation from the
relevant regulator to designate a particular enterprise as a recipient of this
information, based on prudential considerations;”>

provided that this right is not used as a means of avoiding the Party’s commitments or
obligations under this Article.

Article 10.20: Financial Services Committee

1. The Parties hereby establish a Financial Services Committee. The principal
representative of each Party shall be an official of the Party’s authority responsible for
financial services set out in Annex 10-C (Authorities Responsible for Financial Services).

2. The Financial Services Committee shall:

(a) supervise the implementation of this Chapter and its further elaboration;

4 The Parties understand that a measure related to data management means a measure pertaining to the processes by
which data is acquired, validated, protected, and stored.

°5 For greater certainty, this requirement is without prejudice to other means of prudential regulation.

10-16

(b) consider issues regarding financial services that are referred to it by a
Party; and

(c) participate in the dispute settlement procedures in accordance with
Article 10.24 (Investment Disputes in Financial Services).

3. The Financial Services Committee shall meet as the Parties decide to assess the
functioning of this Agreement as it applies to financial services. The Financial Services
Committee shall inform the Joint Committee, established under Article 23.1
(Administrative and Institutional Provisions — Establishment of the Joint Committee) of
the results of any meeting.

Article 10.21: Review of Financial Services Commitments

1. The Financial Services Committee shall, within three years of the date of entry
into force of this Agreement, but no later than five years, and every three years thereafter,
unless otherwise agreed, hold consultations to review the Parties’ respective non-
conforming measures referred to in paragraphs | and 2 of Article 10.10 (Non-
Conforming Measures). The Parties shall, without prejudice to the result, hold these
consultations with a view to increasing the conformity of these non-conforming measures
with this Agreement and further improving the Chapter commitments, including, but not
limited to, the application of Article 10.10.1(c)(i) (Non-Conforming Measures).

2. The Financial Services Committee shall inform the Joint Committee of the results
of these reviews.

Article 10.22: Consultations

1. A Party may request, in writing, consultations with the other Party regarding any
matter arising under this Agreement that affects financial services. The other Party shall
give sympathetic consideration to the request to hold consultations. The consulting
Parties shall report the results of their consultations to the Financial Services Committee.

2. Consultations under this Article shall include officials of the authorities specified
in Annex 10-C (Authorities Responsible for Financial Services).

3. For greater certainty, nothing in this Article shall be construed to require a Party
to derogate from its law regarding sharing of information between financial regulators or
the requirements of an agreement or arrangement between financial authorities of the
Parties, or to require a regulatory authority to take any action that would interfere with
specific regulatory, supervisory, administrative, or enforcement matters.

Article 10.23: Dispute Settlement

1. Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) shall apply as modified by this Article to the
settlement of disputes arising under this Chapter.

10-17

2. Consultations under Article 24.5 (Dispute Settlement — Consultations) shall
include officials of the authorities specified in Annex 10-C (Authorities Responsible for
Financial Services).

3. For disputes arising under this Chapter or a dispute in which a Party invokes
Article 10.11 (Exceptions), when selecting panellists to compose a panel under

Article 24.8 (Dispute Settlement — Panel Composition), each Party shall select panellists
so that:

(a) the chairperson has expertise or experience in financial services law or
practice, such as the regulation of financial institutions, and meets the
qualifications set out in Article 24.9 (Dispute Settlement — Qualifications
of Panellists); and

(b) each of the other panellists:

(1) has expertise or experience in financial services law or practice,
such as the regulation of financial institutions, and meets the
qualifications set out in paragraph 1(b) through 1(f) of Article 24.9
(Dispute Settlement — Qualifications of Panellists); or

(11) meets the qualifications set out in Article 24.9 (Dispute
Settlement — Qualifications of Panellists).

4. If a Party seeks to suspend benefits in the financial services sector, a panel that
reconvenes to make a determination on the proposed suspension of benefits, in
accordance with Article 24.13 (Dispute Settlement — Non-Implementation — Suspension
of Benefits), shall seek the views of financial services experts, as necessary.

5. Notwithstanding Article 24.13 (Dispute Settlement — Non-Implementation —
Suspension of Benefits), when a panel’s determination is that a Party’s measure is
inconsistent with this Agreement and the measure affects:

(a) only a sector other than the financial services sector, the complaining
Party may not suspend benefits in the financial services sector; or

(b) the financial services sector and another sector, the complaining Party may
not suspend benefits in the financial services sector that have an effect that
exceeds the effect of the measure in the complaining Party’s financial
services sector.

Article 10.24: Investment Disputes in Financial Services

1. If a dispute under Section D of Chapter 13 (Investment) involves a measure
referred to in Article 10.2 (Scope), arbitrators shall be selected in accordance with
Article 13.28 (Investment — Arbitrators) as modified in this Article, such that:

(a) the presiding arbitrator has expertise or experience in financial services

law or practice, such as the regulation of financial institutions, and meets
the qualifications set out in Article 13.28 (Investment — Arbitrators); and

10-18

(b) each of the other arbitrators of the Tribunal:

(1) meets the qualifications set out in Article 13.28 (Investment —
Arbitrators); or

(11) has expertise or experience in financial services law or practice,
such as the regulation of financial institutions, and meets the
qualifications set out in paragraphs 3, 6, and 7 of Article 13.28
(Investment — Arbitrators).

2. If an investor of a Party submits a claim to arbitration under Section D of
Chapter 13 (Investment), and the respondent Party asserts a defence under Article 10.11
(Exceptions) the respondent Party shall, no later than the date the Tribunal fixes for the
respondent Party to submit its principal submission on the merits, such as the
counter-memorial, submit in writing to the authorities responsible for financial services
of the Party of the claimant, as set out in Annex 10-C (Authorities Responsible for
Financial Services), a request for a joint determination by the authorities responsible for
financial services of the Parties on the issue of whether and to what extent Article 10.11
(Exceptions) is a valid defence to the claim. The respondent Party shall provide the
Tribunal, if constituted, a copy of its request. The Tribunal may proceed to hear the claim
only as provided in paragraphs 4, 5, and 6.

3. With respect to the joint determination by the authorities of the Parties referred to
in paragraph 2:

(a) the authorities of the Parties shall have 75 days from the date of the receipt
of the request to exchange positions;

(b) the authorities of the Parties shall have 75 days from the exchange of
positions in subparagraph (a) to make a joint determination;

(c) if a joint determination is made under subparagraph (b) the authorities of
either Party shall transmit their decision to the disputing parties and the
Tribunal, if constituted; and

(d) if the authorities of the Parties have not made a joint determination under
subparagraph (b), either Party may request, within 160 days of the receipt
of the request for a joint determination, a panel to be established under
Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) to decide whether and to what extent the
paragraph asserted is a valid defence to the claim. A Party may request the
establishment of a panel without having to request consultations under
Article 24.5 (Dispute Settlement — Consultations). The panel shall transmit
its decision to the disputing parties and to the Tribunal, if constituted.

4. If it is determined in the joint determination referred to in subparagraph 3(b) or
the decision of the panel referred to in subparagraph 3(d) that the paragraph asserted is a
valid defence to all parts of the claim, the claimant is deemed to have withdrawn its claim
and to have discontinued the proceeding, with prejudice. The Tribunal, if constituted,
shall take note of the discontinuance in an order, after which the authority of the Tribunal
shall cease.

10-19

5. If it is determined in the joint determination referred to in subparagraph 3(b) or
the decision of the panel referred to in subparagraph 3(d) that the paragraph asserted is
only a valid defence to a part of the claim, the claimant is deemed to have withdrawn that
part of the claim and to have discontinued that part of the proceedings, with prejudice.
The Tribunal shall take note of the discontinuance of that part of the claim in an order
and shall not proceed with the part of the claim for which the paragraph asserted is
determined to be a valid defence.

6. If the authorities of the Parties do not make a joint determination under
subparagraph 3(b) and no request for the establishment of a panel has been made under
subparagraph 3(d), the Tribunal may decide the matter, provided that:

(a) in addition to the disputing parties, the Party of the claimant may make
oral or written submissions to the Tribunal regarding the issue of whether
and to what extent the paragraph asserted is a valid defence to the claim
prior to the Tribunal deciding this issue. Unless it makes a submission, the
Party of the claimant shall be presumed, for the purposes of the arbitration,
to take a position on the application of the paragraph asserted that is not
inconsistent with that of the respondent Party; and

(b) the Tribunal shall draw no inference regarding the application of the
paragraph asserted from the fact that the authorities of the Parties have not
made a joint determination as described in subparagraph 3(b).

7. For the purposes of this Article, the definitions of the following terms set out in

Article 13.1 (Investment — Definitions) are incorporated, mutatis mutandis: “claimant”,
“disputing parties’, “disputing party”, and “respondent Party”.

10-20

CHAPTER 11

TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Article 11.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

cost-oriented means based on cost, and may include a reasonable profit, and may involve
different cost methodologies for different facilities or services;

end-user means a final consumer of, or subscriber to, a public telecommunications
service, including a service supplier other than a supplier of public telecommunications
Services;

enterprise means an “enterprise” as defined in Article 1.5 (Initial Provisions and General
Definitions — General Definitions) and a branch of an enterprise;

essential facilities means facilities of a public telecommunications network or service
that:

(a) are exclusively or predominantly provided by a single or limited number
of suppliers; and

(b) cannot feasibly be economically or technically substituted in order to
supply a service;

interconnection means linking with suppliers providing public telecommunications
networks or services to allow the users of one supplier to communicate with users of
another supplier and to access services provided by another supplier;

leased circuits means telecommunications facilities between two or more designated
points that are set aside for the dedicated use of, or availability to, particular users;

licence means any authorisation that a Party may require of a person, in accordance with
its laws and regulations, in order for that person to offer a telecommunications network or
service, including concessions, permits, or registrations;

major supplier means a supplier that has the ability to materially affect the terms of
participation (having regard to price and supply) in the relevant market for public
telecommunications networks or services as a result of:

(a) control over essential facilities; or
(b) the use of its position in the market;

network element means a facility or equipment used in supplying a public
telecommunications service, including features, functions, and capabilities provided by
means of that facility or equipment;

non-discriminatory means treatment no less favourable than that accorded to any other
user of like public telecommunications networks or services in like circumstances;

physical co-location means access to space in order to install, maintain, or repair
equipment at premises owned or controlled and used by a major supplier to supply public
telecommunications services;

public telecommunications network means public telecommunications infrastructure
used to provide public telecommunications services between and among defined network
termination points;

public telecommunications service means any telecommunications service required,
explicitly or in effect, by a Party to be offered to the public generally. Such services may
include telegraph, telephone, telex, and data transmission typically involving the real-
time transmission of customer-supplied information between two or more defined points
without any end-to-end change in the form or content of the customer’s information;

reference interconnection offer means an interconnection offer extended by a major
supplier and filed with, approved by, or determined by a telecommunications regulatory
body that sufficiently details the terms, rates and conditions for interconnection so that a
supplier of a public telecommunications service that is willing to accept it may obtain
interconnection with the major supplier on that basis, without having to engage in
negotiations with the major supplier concerned;

telecommunications means the transmission and reception of signals by electromagnetic
means;

telecommunications regulatory body means a body or bodies responsible for the
regulation of telecommunications; and

user means an end-user or a supplier of public telecommunications networks or services.

Article 11.2: Scope of Application
1. This Chapter applies to:

(a) a measure relating to access to and use of public telecommunications
networks or services;

(b) a measure relating to an obligation of a supplier of public
telecommunications networks or services; and

(c) any other measure relating to public telecommunications networks or
services.
2. This Chapter does not apply to a measure affecting the cable or broadcast

distribution of radio or television programming, except to ensure that a cable or broadcast
service supplier has access to and use of public telecommunications networks or services.

3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to:

(a) require a Party to authorise an enterprise of the other Party to establish,
construct, acquire, lease, operate, or supply a telecommunications network
or service, other than as specifically provided for in the former Party’s
commitments under Chapter 8 (Trade in Services);

(b) require a Party to compel an enterprise exclusively engaged in the
broadcast or cable distribution of radio or television programming to make
available its broadcast or cable facilities as a public telecommunications
network;

(c) prevent a Party from prohibiting a person who operates a private network
from using its private network to supply a public telecommunications
network or service to third persons; or

(d) prevent a Party from requiring a supplier of public telecommunications
networks or services to comply with a Party’s measures related to the
regulation of public networks or services, provided that those measures are
not used as a means of avoiding the Party’s obligations under this Chapter.

Article 11.3: Approaches to Regulation

1. The Parties recognise the value of competitive markets to deliver a wide choice in
the supply of telecommunications networks or services and to enhance consumer welfare,
and that economic regulation may not be needed if there is effective competition or if a
service is new to a market. Accordingly, the Parties recognise that regulatory needs and
approaches differ market by market, and that each Party may determine how to
implement its obligations under this Chapter.

2. In this respect, the Parties recognise that a Party may:

(a) engage in direct regulation either in anticipation of an issue that the Party
expects may arise or to resolve an issue that has already arisen in the
market;

(b) rely on the role of market forces, particularly with respect to market
segments that are, or are likely to be, competitive or that have low barriers
to entry, such as services provided by suppliers of telecommunications
services that do not own network facilities; or

(c) use any other appropriate means that benefit the long-term interest of end-
users.

Article 11.4: Access to and Use of Public Telecommunications Networks or Services

1. Each Party shall ensure that an enterprise of the other Party is accorded access to
and use of public telecommunications networks or services, including leased circuits,
offered in its territory or across its borders, and on terms and conditions that are
reasonable and non-discriminatory. This obligation shall be applied, among other things,
through paragraphs 2 through 6.

2. Subject to paragraphs 5 and 6, each Party shall ensure that an enterprise of the
other Party is permitted to:

(a) purchase or lease, and attach terminal or other equipment that interfaces
with a public telecommunications network and that is necessary to supply
its services;

(b) connect leased or owned circuits with public telecommunications
networks or services or with circuits leased or owned by another service
supplier;

(c) use operating protocols of its choice other than as necessary to interface
with public telecommunications networks or services;

(d) perform switching, signalling, processing, and conversion functions; and

(e) provide services to individual or multiple end-users over leased or owned
circuits.

3. Each Party shall ensure that an enterprise of the other Party may use public
telecommunications networks or services for the movement of information in its territory
or across its borders, including for intra-corporate communications of those service
suppliers, and for access to information contained in a database or otherwise stored in
machine-readable form in the territory of any Party.

4. Notwithstanding paragraph 3, a Party may take measures that are necessary to
ensure the security and confidentiality of messages and to protect the personal
information of end-users of public telecommunications networks or services, provided
that those measures are not applied in a manner that would constitute a means of arbitrary
or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade in services.

5. Each Party shall ensure that no condition is imposed on access to and use of
public telecommunications networks or services, other than as necessary to:

(a) safeguard the public service responsibilities of suppliers of public
telecommunications networks or services, in particular their ability to
make their networks or services available to the public generally; or

(b) — protect the technical integrity of public telecommunications networks or
services.

6. Provided that they satisfy the criteria set out in paragraph 5, conditions for access
to and use of public telecommunications networks or services may include:

(a) a requirement to use a specified technical interface, including an interface
protocol, for connection with public telecommunications networks or
Services;

(b) a requirement, if necessary, for the interoperability of public
telecommunications networks or services;

(c) type approval of terminal or other equipment that interfaces with public
telecommunications networks and technical requirements relating to the
attachment of that equipment to those networks;

(d) a restriction on connection of leased or owned circuits with public
telecommunications networks or services or with circuits leased or owned
by other service suppliers; or

(e) a requirement for notification and licensing.

Article 11.5: Competitive Safeguards

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain appropriate measures for the purpose of
preventing suppliers that, alone or together, are a major supplier in its territory from
engaging in or continuing anti-competitive practices.

2. The anti-competitive practices referred to in paragraph | include, in particular:
(a) engaging in anti-competitive cross-subsidisation;

(b) using information obtained from competitors with anti-competitive
results; and

(c) not making available to other suppliers of public telecommunications
networks or services, on a timely basis, technical information about
essential facilities and commercially relevant information that are
necessary for them to provide services.

3. For greater certainty, nothing in this Article prevents a Party from maintaining
measures for the purpose of preventing anti-competitive practices by suppliers of public
telecommunications networks or services that are not major suppliers.

Article 11.6: Treatment by Major Suppliers

Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory accords to suppliers of
public telecommunications networks or services of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that major supplier accords in like circumstances to its subsidiaries and
affiliates, or non-affiliated service suppliers, regarding:

(a) the availability, provisioning, rates, or quality of like public
telecommunications networks or services; and

(b) the availability of technical interfaces necessary for interconnection.

Article 11.7: Resale

Each Party may determine, in accordance with its laws and regulations, which
public telecommunications services must be offered for resale by a major supplier based
on the need to promote competition or to benefit the long-term interests of end-users. If a
Party has determined that a service must be offered for resale by a major supplier, that
Party shall ensure that any major supplier in its territory does not impose unreasonable or
discriminatory conditions or limitations on the resale of that service.

Article 11.8: Interconnection - Obligations Relating to Suppliers of Public
Telecommunications Networks or Services

1. Each Party shall ensure that a supplier of public telecommunications networks or
services in its territory provides interconnection with the suppliers of public
telecommunications networks or services of the other Party on reasonable and non-
discriminatory terms and conditions.

2. In carrying out paragraph 1, each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public
telecommunications networks or services in its territory protect the confidentiality of
commercially sensitive or confidential information of, or relating to, users of public
telecommunications services obtained as a result of interconnection arrangements and
that those suppliers only use that information for the purposes of providing these services.

Article 11.9: Interconnection - Obligations Relating to Major Suppliers

1. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides
interconnection for the facilities and equipment of suppliers of public
telecommunications networks or services of the other Party at any technically feasible
point in the major supplier’s network. That interconnection shall be provided:

(a) under non-discriminatory terms, conditions (including technical standards
and specifications), and rates;

(b) of a quality no less favourable than that provided by the major supplier for
its own like services, for like services of non-affiliated service suppliers,
or for its subsidiaries or other affiliates;

(c) on a timely basis, on terms, conditions (including technical standards and
specifications), and at cost-oriented rates, that are transparent, reasonable
(having regard to economic feasibility), and sufficiently unbundled so that
the supplier of public telecommunications networks or services of the
other Party need not pay for network components or facilities that it does
not require for the services to be provided; and

(d) on request, at points in addition to the network termination points offered
to the majority of suppliers of public telecommunications networks or
services, subject to charges that reflect the cost of construction of
necessary additional facilities.

2. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides suppliers of
public telecommunications services of the other Party with the opportunity to
interconnect their facilities and equipment with those of the major supplier through at
least one of the following options:

(a) a reference interconnection offer or any other interconnection offer
containing the rates, terms, and conditions that the major supplier offers
generally to suppliers of public telecommunications services;

(b) the terms and conditions of an interconnection agreement that is in
effect; or

(c) a new interconnection agreement through commercial negotiation.

3. Each Party shall ensure that the procedures applicable for interconnection to a
major supplier are made publicly available.

4. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory makes publicly
available either its interconnection agreements or reference interconnection offer.

Article 11.10: Provisioning and Pricing of Leased Circuits Services

Each Party shall, subject to technical feasibility, ensure that a major supplier in its
territory provides suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services of the
other Party leased circuits services that are public telecommunications services on a
timely basis, on non-discriminatory terms, conditions (including technical standards and
specifications), and at rates, that are reasonable (having regard to economic feasibility),
and based on a generally available offer.

Article 11.11: Co-location

1. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier that has control over essential
facilities in its territory allows suppliers of public telecommunications networks or
services of the other Party in the Party’s territory physical co-location of their equipment
necessary for interconnection or access to unbundled network elements based on a
generally available offer on a timely basis, and on terms, conditions (including technical
feasibility and space availability where applicable), and at rates, that are reasonable, non-
discriminatory, and transparent.

2. Where physical co-location is not practical for technical reasons or because of
space limitations, each Party shall endeavour to ensure that a major supplier in its
territory provides an alternative solution, on a timely basis, and on terms and conditions
and at rates, that are reasonable, non-discriminatory, and transparent.

3. A Party may determine, in accordance with its laws and regulations, which
premises owned or controlled by major suppliers in its territory are subject to paragraphs
1 and 2, having regard to factors such as the state of competition in the market where co-
location is required, and whether those premises can feasibly be economically or
technically substituted in order to provide a competing service.

Article 11.12: International Submarine Cable Systems

1. If a Party has authorised a major supplier in its territory to operate an international
submarine cable system as a public telecommunications network or service, that Party
shall ensure that the major supplier accords a supplier of public telecommunications
networks or services of the other Party access to the international submarine cable system
on reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and conditions.

2. A Party may determine the point at which access to the international submarine
cable system is to be provided.

Article 11.13: Unbundling of Network Elements

Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory offers to public
telecommunications service suppliers access to network elements on an unbundled basis
on terms, conditions, and at rates, that are reasonable and non-discriminatory for the
supply of public telecommunications services. A Party may determine, in accordance
with its laws and regulations, the network elements required to be made available in its
territory, and the suppliers that may obtain those elements.

Article 11.14: Access to Poles, Ducts, Conduits, and Rights-of-Way

1. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides
access to poles, ducts, conduits, and rights-of-way or any other structures as determined
by the Party, owned or controlled by the major supplier, to suppliers of public
telecommunications services of the other Party in the Party’s territory on a timely basis,
and on terms, conditions, and at rates, that are reasonable, non-discriminatory, and
transparent, subject to technical feasibility.

2. A Party may determine, in accordance with its laws and regulations, the poles,
ducts, conduits, rights-of-way, or any other structures to which it requires major suppliers
in its territory to provide access in accordance with paragraph 1. When the Party makes
this determination, it shall take into account factors such as the competitive effect of lack
of this access, whether these structures can be substituted in an economically or
technically feasible manner in order to provide a competitive service, or other specified
public interest factors.

Article 11.15: Independent Telecommunications Regulatory Body

1. Each Party shall ensure that its telecommunications regulatory body is separate
from, and not accountable to, any supplier of public telecommunications services.

2. Each Party shall ensure that the regulatory decisions of, and the procedures used
by, its telecommunications regulatory body are impartial with respect to all market
participants.

Article 11.16: Universal Service

Each Party has the right to define the kind of universal service obligations it
wishes to maintain. These obligations shall not be regarded as anti-competitive per se,
provided that they are administered in a transparent, non-discriminatory, and
competitively neutral manner, and are not more burdensome than necessary for the kind
of universal service defined by the Party.

Article 11.17: Licensing

1. If a Party requires a supplier of public telecommunications services to have a
licence, the Party shall ensure the public availability of:

(a) all the licensing criteria and procedures that it applies;

(b) the period that it normally requires to reach a decision concerning an
application for a licence; and

(c) the terms and conditions of all licences in effect.

2. The Party shall notify an applicant of the outcome of its application without
undue delay after a decision has been taken.

3. Each Party shall ensure that, upon request, an applicant or a licensee is provided
with the reasons for the:

(a) denial of a licence;
(b) imposition of supplier-specific conditions on a licence;
(c) refusal to renew a licence; or

(d) revocation of a licence.

Article 11.18: Allocation and Use of Scarce Resources

1. Each Party shall administer its procedures for the allocation and use of scarce
resources related to telecommunications, including frequencies, numbers, and rights-of-
way, in an objective, timely, transparent, and non-discriminatory manner.

2. Each Party shall make publicly available the current state of frequency bands
allocated to specific uses but shall not be required to provide detailed identification of
frequencies that are allocated for specific government uses.

3. For greater certainty, a measure of a Party allocating and assigning spectrum and
managing frequency is not per se inconsistent with Article 8.5 (Trade in Services -
Market Access). Accordingly, each Party retains the right to establish and apply spectrum
and frequency management policies that may have the effect of limiting the number of
suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services, provided that the Party does
so in a manner consistent with other provisions of Chapter 8 (Trade in Services). This
includes the ability to allocate frequency bands, taking into account current and future
needs and spectrum availability.

4. When making a spectrum allocation for commercial telecommunications services,
each Party shall endeavour to rely on an open and transparent process that considers the
public interest, including the promotion of competition. Each Party shall endeavour to
rely generally on market-based approaches in assigning spectrum for terrestrial
commercial telecommunications services, if appropriate. Accordingly, each Party may
use mechanisms such as auctions, administrative incentive pricing, or unlicensed use, if
appropriate, to assign spectrum for commercial use.

Article 11.19: Transparency

1. Further to Article 22.2 (Transparency, Anti-Corruption, and Responsible Business
Conduct — Publication), each Party shall endeavour to ensure that when its
telecommunications regulatory body seeks input on a proposal for a law or regulation,
that body provides relevant suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services
of the other Party operating in its territory an opportunity to comment. That body shall:

(a) make the proposal public or otherwise available to any interested persons;
(b) include an explanation of the purpose of and reasons for the proposal;

(c) provide interested persons with adequate public notice of the ability to
comment and reasonable opportunity to comment;

(d) to the extent practicable, make publicly available all relevant comments
filed with it; and

(e) respond to all significant and relevant issues raised in comments filed, in
the course of issuance of the final regulation. !

2. Each Party shall ensure that relevant information on conditions affecting access to
and use of public telecommunications networks or services is publicly available,
including:

(a) tariffs and other terms and conditions of service;
(b) specifications of technical interfaces with those networks or services;
(c) conditions for attaching terminal or other equipment; and

(d) requirements for notification or licensing, if any.

Article 11.20: Resolution of Telecommunications Disputes

1. Each Party shall ensure that a supplier of public telecommunications networks or
services of the other Party may have timely recourse to a telecommunications regulatory
body or dispute resolution body of the Party to resolve disputes with a supplier of a
public telecommunications network or service relating to matters covered by this Chapter
in accordance with its laws and regulations.

2. Each Party shall ensure that any supplier of public telecommunications networks
or services aggrieved by a final determination or decision of its relevant

telecommunications regulatory body may obtain a review of that determination or
decision in accordance with its laws and regulations.

' For greater certainty, a Party may consolidate its responses to the comments received from interested persons.

11-10

3. A Party shall not permit the making of an application for review to constitute
grounds for non-compliance with the determination or decision of its telecommunications
regulatory body, unless its relevant body determines otherwise.

Article 11.21: Relation to International Organisations
The Parties recognise the importance of international standards for global

compatibility and interoperability of telecommunications networks or services and
undertake to promote those standards through the work of relevant international bodies.

Article 11.22: Relation to Other Chapters

In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and any other Chapter of
this Agreement, this Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

11-11

CHAPTER 12

ELECTRONIC COMMERCE

Article 12.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

computing facilities means computer servers and storage devices for processing or
storing information for commercial use;

covered person means:

(a) a covered investment as defined in Article 13.1 (Investment —
Definitions);

(b) an investor of a Party as defined in Article 13.1 (Investment —
Definitions); or

(c) a service supplier of a Party as defined in Article 8.1 (Trade in
Services — Definitions),

but does not include a “covered person” as defined in Article 10.1 (Financial
Services — Definitions) or a credit reporting body;

electronic authentication means the process or act of verifying:
(a) the identity of a party to an electronic communication or transaction; and

(b) an electronic statement or claim in an electronic communication or
transaction;

to ensure the integrity of, and establish a level of confidence in, the electronic
communication or transaction;

personal data means any data, including information, relating to an identified or
identifiable natural person;

trade administration documents means forms issued or controlled by a Party that must
be completed by or for an importer or exporter in relation to the import or export of
goods;

transmitted electronically means a transmission to an electronic address using any
electromagnetic means; and

unsolicited commercial electronic message means a message transmitted electronically

for commercial or marketing purposes without the consent of the recipient or despite the
explicit rejection of the recipient.

12-1

Article 12.2: Scope and General Provisions

1. The Parties recognise the economic growth and opportunities provided by
electronic commerce and the importance of frameworks that promote consumer
confidence in electronic commerce and of facilitating its use and development.

2. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party that affect
trade by electronic means.

3. This Chapter does not apply:
(a) to government procurement; or

(b) except for Article 12.15 (Open Government Data), to information held or
processed by or on behalf of a Party, or measures related to that
information, including measures related to its collection.

4. For greater certainty, measures affecting the supply of a service delivered or
produced electronically are subject to the obligations contained in the relevant provisions
of:

(a) Chapter 8 (Trade in Services);
(b) Chapter 10 (Financial Services); and
(c) Chapter 13 (Investment),

including any exceptions or non-conforming measures set out in this Agreement that are
applicable to those obligations.

5. To the extent that a measure referred to in paragraph 4 is adopted or maintained in
accordance with Article 8.7 (Trade in Services — Reservations), Article 10.10 (Financial
Services — Non-Conforming Measures), Article 13.18 (Investment — Non-Conforming
Measures and Exceptions), or any exception that is applicable to the obligations in
Chapter 8 (Trade in Services), Chapter 10 (Financial Services), or Chapter 13
(Investment), it does not give rise to a violation of Article 12.10 (Cross-Border Transfer
of Information by Electronic Means), Article 12.11 (Location of Computing Facilities),
or Article 12.14 (Source Code).

Article 12.3: Cooperation

Recognising the global nature of electronic commerce, each Party shall
endeavour to:

(a) work together to assist micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises to
overcome obstacles to its use;

12-2

(b) exchange information and share experiences on regulations, policies,
enforcement, and compliance regarding electronic commerce, such as:

(1) personal data protection;

(11) online consumer protection, including means for consumer redress
and building consumer confidence;

(111) unsolicited commercial electronic messages;
(iv) security in electronic communications; and
(v) authentication.

(c) exchange information and share views on consumer access to products and
services offered online;

(d) participate actively in regional and multilateral fora to promote the
development of electronic commerce, including in relation to the
development and application of international standards for electronic
commerce; and

(e) encourage development by the private sector of methods of self-regulation
that foster electronic commerce, including codes of conduct, model
contracts, guidelines, and enforcement mechanisms.

Article 12.4: Paperless Trading

1. Each Party shall endeavour to make trade administration documents available to
the public in electronic form.

2. Each Party shall accept electronic versions of its trade administration documents
as the legal equivalent of paper documents except where:

(a) there is a domestic or international legal requirement to the contrary; or

(b) doing so would reduce the effectiveness of the trade administration
process.

3. The Parties shall cooperate bilaterally and in international fora to enhance the
acceptance of electronic versions of trade administration documents.

Article 12.5: Electronic Authentication and Electronic Signatures
1. Except in circumstances otherwise provided for under its law, a Party shall not

deny the legal validity of a signature solely on the basis that the signature is in electronic
form.

12-3

2. Taking into account international norms for electronic authentication, each Party
shall:

(a) permit participants in electronic transactions to determine the appropriate
authentication methods for their electronic transactions;

(b) not limit the recognition of authentication methods; and

(c) permit participants in electronic transactions to have the opportunity to
demonstrate that their electronic transactions comply with the Party’s laws
and regulations.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, each Party may require that, for a particular
category of electronic transactions, the method of electronic authentication meets certain
performance standards or is certified by an authority accredited in accordance with its
laws and regulations.

4. The Parties shall encourage the use of interoperable electronic authentication.

Article 12.6: Online Consumer Protection

1. The Parties recognise the importance of adopting and maintaining transparent and
effective measures to protect consumers from fraudulent and deceptive commercial
activities when they engage in electronic commerce.

2. For the purposes of this Article, “fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities”
refers to those commercial practices that cause actual harm to consumers, or that pose an
imminent threat of that harm if not prevented, such as:

(a) a practice of making misrepresentations of material fact, including implied
factual misrepresentations, that cause significant detriment to the
economic interests of misled consumers;

(b) a practice of failing to deliver products or provide services to consumers
after the consumers are charged; or

(c) a practice of charging or debiting consumers’ financial, telephone, or other
accounts without authorisation.

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain laws or regulations to provide protection for
consumers using electronic commerce against fraudulent and deceptive commercial
activities that cause harm or potential harm.

4. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation between their respective
national consumer protection agencies or other relevant bodies on activities related to
cross-border electronic commerce in order to enhance consumer welfare.

12-4

5. Each Party shall publish information on the consumer protection it provides to
users of electronic commerce, including how:

(a) consumers can pursue remedies; and

(b) — businesses can comply with, or acquire information on, any legal
requirements.

Article 12.7: Online Personal Data Protection

1. The Parties recognise the economic and social benefits of protecting the personal
data of users of electronic commerce and the contribution that this makes to enhancing
consumer confidence in electronic commerce.

2. To this end, each Party shall adopt or maintain a legal framework that provides for
the protection of the personal data of the users of electronic commerce. In the
development of its legal framework for the protection of personal data, each Party shall
take into account principles and guidelines of relevant international bodies.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to adopt non-discriminatory practices in protecting
users of electronic commerce from personal data protection violations occurring within
its jurisdiction.

4. Each Party shall publish information on the personal data protection it provides to
users of electronic commerce, including how:

(a) individuals can pursue remedies; and

(b) businesses can comply with any legal requirements.

Article 12.8: Unsolicited Commercial Electronic Messages

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures regarding unsolicited commercial
electronic messages that:

(a) require suppliers of unsolicited commercial electronic messages to
facilitate the ability of recipients to prevent ongoing reception of those
messages;

(b) require the consent, as specified according to the laws and regulations of
each Party, of recipients to receive commercial electronic messages; or

(c) otherwise provide for the minimisation of unsolicited commercial
electronic messages.

2. Each Party shall provide recourse against suppliers of unsolicited commercial
electronic messages that do not comply with the measures adopted or maintained
pursuant to paragraph 1.

12-5

3. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in appropriate cases of mutual concern
regarding the regulation of unsolicited commercial electronic messages.

4. A Party shall apply this Article to unsolicited commercial electronic messages
delivered through one or more modes of delivery, including Short Message

Service (“SMS”), instant messaging, or electronic mail. Each Party shall endeavour to
adopt or maintain measures consistent with this Article that apply to other modes of
delivery of unsolicited commercial electronic messages.

Article 12.9: Domestic Regulatory Frameworks

1. Each Party shall maintain a legal framework governing electronic transactions
consistent with the principles of the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic

Commerce 1996 or the United Nations Convention on the Use of Electronic
Communications in International Contracts, done at New York on 23 November 2005.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to avoid any unnecessary regulatory burden on
electronic transactions.

Article 12.10: Cross-Border Transfer of Information by Electronic Means

1. The Parties recognise that each Party may have its own regulatory requirements
concerning the transfer of information by electronic means.

2. A Party shall not prevent cross-border transfer of information by electronic
means, including personal data, when this activity is for the conduct of the business of a
covered person.

3. This Article does not prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining:

(a) a measure inconsistent with paragraph 2 that is necessary to achieve a
legitimate public policy objective, provided that the measure is not applied
in a manner that would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable
discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade; or

(b) a measure that it considers necessary for the protection of its essential
security interests. That measure, if adopted or maintained, shall not be
disputed by the other Party.

Article 12.11: Location of Computing Facilities

1. The Parties recognise that each Party may have its own measures regarding the
use or location of computing facilities, including requirements that seek to ensure the
security and confidentiality of communications.

2. A Party shall not require a covered person to use or locate computing facilities in
that Party’s territory as a condition for conducting business in that territory.

12-6

3. This Article does not prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining:

(a) a measure inconsistent with paragraph 2 that is necessary to achieve a
legitimate public policy objective, provided that the measure is not applied
in a manner that would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable
discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade; or

(b) a measure that it considers necessary for the protection of its essential
security interests. That measure, if adopted or maintained, shall not be
disputed by the other Party.

Article 12.12: Customs Duties

1. Each Party shall maintain its current practice of not imposing customs duties on
electronic transmissions between the Parties.

2. The practice referred to in paragraph 1 is in accordance with the WTO Ministerial
Decision (WT/MIN (24)/38), adopted on 2 March 2024, in relation to the Work
Programme on Electronic Commerce.

3. Each Party may adjust its practice referred to in paragraph 1 with respect to any
further outcomes in WTO Ministerial Decisions on customs duties on electronic
transmissions within the framework of the Work Programme on Electronic Commerce.

4. The Parties shall review this Article in light of any further WTO Ministerial
Decisions in relation to the Work Programme on Electronic Commerce.

5. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 does not preclude a Party from imposing taxes,
fees, or other charges on electronic transmissions, provided that those taxes, fees, or
charges are imposed in a manner consistent with this Agreement.

Article 12.13: Principles on Access to and Use of the Internet for Electronic
Commerce

Subject to applicable laws and regulations, the Parties recognise that it is
beneficial for consumers in their territories to be able to:

(a) access and use services and applications of a consumer’s choice available
on the Internet, subject to reasonable network management; and

(b) connect the end-user devices of a consumer’s choice to the Internet.

Article 12.14: Source Code
1. A Party shall not require the transfer of, or access to, source code of software

owned by a person of the other Party as a condition for the import, distribution, sale, or
use of that software, or of products containing that software, in its territory.

12-7

2. This Article does not preclude a regulatory body or judicial authority of a Party
from requiring a person of the other Party to preserve and make available the source code
of software for a specific investigation, inspection, examination, enforcement action, or
judicial proceeding', subject to safeguards against unauthorised disclosure.

Article 12.15: Open Government Data

1. The Parties recognise that facilitating public access to and use of government
information fosters economic and social development, competitiveness, and innovation.

2. To the extent that a Party chooses to make government information, including
data, available to the public, it shall endeavour to ensure that the information is in a
machine-readable, open format and can be searched, retrieved, used, reused, and
redistributed.

3. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate to identify ways in which each Party can
expand access to and use of government information, including data, that the Party has
made public, with a view to enhancing and generating business opportunities, especially
for small and medium-sized enterprises.

Article 12.16: Cyber Security
The Parties recognise the importance of:
(a) building and maintaining the capabilities of their national entities
responsible for computer security incident response, including through

exchange of best practices; and

(b) using existing collaboration mechanisms to cooperate on matters related to
cyber security.

' This disclosure shall not be construed to negatively affect the software source code’s status as a trade secret, if that
status is claimed by the trade secret owner.

12-8

CHAPTER 13

INVESTMENT

Section A: Definitions

Article 13.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
algorithm means a defined sequence of steps, taken to solve a problem or obtain a result;

claimant means an investor of a Party that makes a claim under Article 13.25
(Submission of a Claim to Arbitration);

confidential information means confidential business information or information that is
privileged or otherwise protected from disclosure under the law of a Party;

disputing parties means the claimant and the respondent Party;
disputing party means either the claimant or the respondent Party;

enterprise means an enterprise as defined in Article 1.5 (Initial Provisions and General
Definitions - General Definitions) and a branch! of an enterprise;

existing means in effect on the date of entry into force of this Agreement;
ICSID means the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes;

ICSID Additional Facility Rules means the Rules Governing the Additional Facility for
the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes in their most recent form;

ICSID Convention means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States done at Washington, D.C.
on 18 March 1965;

intellectual property rights means copyright and related rights, trademark rights,
rights in geographical indications, rights in industrial designs, patent rights, rights in
layout designs of integrated circuits, rights in relation to protection of undisclosed
information, and plant breeders’ rights;
investment means:

(a) any of the following:

(1) an enterprise;

(11) a share, stock, or other form of equity participation in an
enterprise, or any other kind of interest in an enterprise recognised
under the domestic law of the Party;

' For greater certainty, the inclusion of “branch” in the definition of “enterprise” is without prejudice to a Party’s
ability, under its law, to treat a branch as an entity that has no independent legal existence and is not separately
organised.

13-1

(iii) | a bond, debenture, or other debt instrument of an enterprise;”
(iv) a loan to an enterprise;

(v) an interest arising from the commitment of capital or other
resources in the territory of a Party to economic activity in that
territory, such as under a contract involving the presence of an
investor’s property in the territory of the Party, including a turnkey
or construction contract, a concession, or other similar contract;

(vi) intellectual property rights; and

(vii) any other tangible or intangible, moveable or immovable, property
and related property rights;

(b) in each case shall involve the commitment of capital or other resources,
the expectation of gain or profit, certain duration, or the assumption of
risk; and

(c) for the purposes of this definition, “investment” does not mean:
(1) a claim to money that arises solely from:

(A) | a commercial contract for the sale of a good or service by a
national or enterprise in the territory of a Party to an
enterprise in the territory of the other Party, or

(B) — the extension of credit in connection with a commercial
transaction, such as trade financing;

(ii) an order or judgment in a judicial or administrative action; or

(111) any other claim to money, that does not involve the kinds of
interests set out in sub-subparagraphs (a)(1) to (vii);

investor of a Party means a Party, or a national’ or an enterprise of a Party, other than a
branch, that seeks to make’, is making, or has made an investment in the territory of the
other Party. For the purposes of this definition, enterprise of a Party means:

> Some forms of debt, such as bonds, debentures, and long-term notes, are more likely to constitute an investment,
while other forms of debt, such as claims to payment that are immediately due and result from the sale of goods or
services, are less likely to involve the elements set out in subparagraph (b) and therefore to constitute an investment.

3 For greater certainty, a natural person who is a dual citizen shall be deemed to be exclusively a national of the Party of
his or her dominant and effective nationality.

4 For greater certainty, the Parties understand that, for the purposes of the definition of “investor of a Party”, an investor
“seeks to make” an investment when that investor has taken concrete actions to make an investment. Where a
notification or approval process is required for making an investment, an investor that “seeks to make” an investment
refers to an investor of the other Party that has initiated such notification or approval process.

13-2

(a) an enterprise that is constituted or organised under the law of that Party
and that has substantial business activities in the territory of that Party. A
determination of whether an enterprise has substantial business activities
in the territory of a Party requires a case-by-case, fact-based inquiry; or

(b) an enterprise that is constituted or organised under the law of that Party,
and is directly or indirectly owned or controlled by a national of that Party
or by an enterprise mentioned under subparagraph (a);

New York Convention means the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York on 10 June 1958;

non-disputing Party means a Party that is not a disputing party to an investment dispute;

respondent Party means a Party against which a claim is made under
Article 13.25(Submission of a Claim to Arbitration);

third party funding means any funding or other equivalent support provided by a person
who is not a disputing party in order to finance part or all of the cost of the proceedings
including through a donation or grant, or in return for remuneration dependent on the
outcome of the dispute;

Tribunal means an arbitration tribunal established under Section D (Investor-State
Dispute Settlement); and

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules means the arbitration rules of the United Nations

Commission on International Trade Law, adopted by the United Nations General
Assembly on 15 December 1976, as revised in 2010.

Section B: Investment Protections

Article 13.2: Scope

1. This Chapter applies to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
(a) an investor of the other Party;
(b) a covered investment; and

(c) with respect to Article 13.5 (Regulatory Objectives) and Article 13.12
(Performance Requirements), an investment in the territory of that Party.

2. A Party’s obligations under this Chapter apply to a measure adopted or
maintained by:

(a) the central, regional, or other governments or authorities of that Party; and

13-3

(b) any person, including a state enterprise or any other body, when it
exercises any governmental authority delegated to it by central, regional,
or other governments or authorities of that Party.

3. This Chapter does not apply to:
(a) procurement by a Party;

(b) a subsidy or grant provided by a Party, including a government supported
loan, guarantee, or insurance.

4. This Chapter does not bind a Party in relation to an act or fact that took place or a
situation that ceased to exist before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 13.3: Relation to other Chapters

1. This Chapter does not apply to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party to the
extent that it is covered by Chapter 8 (Trade in Services) or Chapter 10 (Financial
Services).

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, this Chapter applies to a measure adopted or
maintained by a Party relating to the supply of a service in its territory through
commercial presence as defined in Article 8.1 (Trade in Services — Definitions) by a
service supplier, to the extent that such a measure is covered by Article 13.2.1 (Scope).

3. A requirement of a Party that a service supplier of the other Party post a bond or
other form of financial security as a condition for the cross-border supply of a service
does not of itself make this Chapter applicable to a measure adopted or maintained by the
Party relating to the cross-border supply of the service. This Chapter applies to a measure
adopted or maintained by the Party relating to the posted bond or financial security, to the
extent that the bond or financial security is a covered investment

4. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and any other Chapter of
this Agreement, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency, except
that, where paragraph 2 applies, this Chapter prevails over Chapter 8 (Trade in Services).

Article 13.4: Right to Regulate

1. The Parties reaffirm the right of each Party to regulate within its territory to
achieve legitimate policy objectives.

2. For greater certainty, the mere fact that a Party regulates, including through a
modification to its laws, in a manner that negatively affects an investment or interferes
with an investor’s expectations, including its expectation of profits, does not amount to a
breach of an obligation under this Chapter.

13-4

Article 13.5: Regulatory Objectives

The Parties recognise the importance of encouraging investments that respect
health, safety, the environment, and other regulatory objectives or the rights of Indigenous
Peoples.° Accordingly, a Party shall not relax, waive, or otherwise derogate from, or offer
to relax, waive, or otherwise derogate from, these measures in order to encourage the
establishment, acquisition, expansion, or management of the investment of an investor in
its territory.

Article 13.6: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to an investor of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with
respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation,
and sale or other disposition of an investment in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to a covered investment treatment no less favourable than
that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments of its own investors with respect to
the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or
other disposition of an investment in its territory.

3. The treatment accorded by a Party under paragraphs | and 2 means, with respect

to a government other than at the central level, treatment accorded, in like circumstances,
by that government to investors, and to investments of investors, of the Party of which it

forms a part.

4. Whether treatment is accorded in like circumstances depends on the totality of the
circumstances. Such circumstances include whether the relevant treatment distinguishes
between investors or investments on the basis of legitimate public policy objectives, and,
if relevant, competition in the economic or business sector concerned and the applicable
legal and regulatory framework.

5. Paragraphs 1 and 2 prohibit discrimination based on nationality. A difference in
treatment accorded to an investor or covered investment and a Party’s own investors or
investments of its own investors does not, in and of itself, establish discrimination based
on nationality.

Article 13.7: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to an investor of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors of a non-Party with
respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation,
and sale or other disposition of an investment in its territory.

> Indigenous Peoples refers to:

(a) for Canada, Aboriginal peoples (including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples) as defined in
subsection 35(2) of the Constitution Act, 1982 of Canada;
(b) for Indonesia, Masyarakat Hukum Adat in accordance with Indonesia’s laws and regulations.

13-5

2. Each Party shall accord to a covered investment treatment no less favourable than
that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments of investors of a non-Party with
respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation,
and sale or other disposition of an investment in its territory.

3. The treatment accorded by a Party under paragraphs 1 and 2 means, with respect
to a government other than at the central level, treatment accorded, in like circumstances,
by that government to investors, and to investments of investors, of the Party of which it
forms a part.

4. Whether treatment is accorded in like circumstances depends on the totality of the
circumstances. Such circumstances include whether the relevant treatment distinguishes
between investors or investments on the basis of legitimate public policy objectives, and,
if relevant, competition in the economic or business sector concerned and the applicable
legal and regulatory framework.

5. Paragraphs 1 and 2 prohibit discrimination based on nationality. A difference in
treatment accorded to an investor or covered investment and a non-Party’s investors or
investments of a non-Party’s investors does not, in and of itself, establish discrimination
based on nationality.

6. The treatment referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 does not include procedures or
mechanisms for the resolution of investment disputes between investors and States
provided for in other international investment treaties and other trade agreements

7. Substantive obligations in other international investment treaties and other trade
agreements do not in themselves constitute treatment, and thus cannot give rise to a
breach of this Article, in the absence of measures adopted or maintained by a Party
pursuant to those obligations.

Article 13.8: Treatment in Case of Armed Conflict or Civil Strife

1. Each Party shall accord to an investor of the other Party and to a covered
investment, with respect to measures it adopts or maintains relating to restitution,
indemnification, compensation, or other settlement for losses incurred by investments in
its territory as a result of armed conflict or civil strife, treatment no less favourable than it
accords, in like circumstances, to:

(a) its Own investors and their investments; or
(b) investors of a non-Party and their investments.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if an investor of a Party, in a situation referred to in
paragraph 1, suffers a loss in the territory of the other Party resulting from:

(a) requisitioning of its covered investment or part thereof by the latter’s
forces or authorities; or

13-6

(b) destruction of its covered investment or part thereof by the latter’s forces
or authorities, which was not required by the necessity of the situation,

the latter Party shall provide the investor restitution, compensation, or both, as
appropriate, for that loss.°

Article 13.9: Minimum Standard of Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord in its territory to a covered investment of the other Party
and to an investor with respect to their covered investment treatment in accordance with
the customary international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens. A Party
breaches this obligation only if a measure constitutes:

(a) denial of justice in criminal, civil, or administrative proceedings;

(b) fundamental breach of due process in judicial and administrative
proceedings;

(c) manifest arbitrariness;/

(d) targeted discrimination on manifestly wrongful grounds such as gender,
race, or religious beliefs;

(e) abusive treatment of investors, such as physical coercion, duress, and
harassment; or

(f) a failure to provide full protection and security.®

2. A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of this
Agreement, or of a separate international agreement, does not establish that there has
been a breach of this Article.

3. The fact that a measure breaches domestic law does not establish a breach of this
Article.

Article 13.10: Expropriation

1. A Party shall not expropriate a covered investment either directly or indirectly,
except:

(a) for a public purpose;? '°

(b) in accordance with due process of law;

6 For greater certainty, the value of the restitution or compensation shall not exceed the loss suffered.

7 A measure is manifestly arbitrary when it is evident that the measure is not rationally connected to a legitimate policy
objective, such as when a measure is based on prejudice or bias rather than on reason or fact.

8 For greater certainty, full protection and security refers only to physical security. Each Party is required to take
measures that are reasonable under the circumstances to ensure full protection and security.

° For Canada, the meaning of “public purpose” may apply differently for the purposes of an Indigenous government.

‘0 For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Article, the term “public purpose” refers to a concept in customary
international law. A Party’s domestic law may express this or a similar concept by using different terms, such as

99 66.

“public necessity”, “public interest”, or “public use”.

13-7

(c) in a non-discriminatory manner; and
(d) on payment of compensation in accordance with paragraph 5.

2. A direct expropriation occurs only when a covered investment is nationalised or
taken by a Party through formal transfer of title or outright seizure.

3. An indirect expropriation may occur when a measure or a series of measures of a
Party has an effect equivalent to direct expropriation without formal transfer of title or
outright seizure. A non-discriminatory measure of a Party that is adopted and maintained
in good faith to protect legitimate public welfare objectives, such as health, safety, and
the environment, does not constitute an expropriation. The determination of whether a
measure or a series of measures of a Party has an effect equivalent to direct expropriation
requires a case-by-case, fact-based inquiry that shall consider:

(a) the economic impact of the measure or the series of measures, although
the sole fact that a measure or a series of measures of a Party has an
adverse effect on the economic value of a covered investment does not
establish that an indirect expropriation has occurred;

(b) the duration of the measure or series of measures of a Party;

(c) the extent to which the measure or the series of measures interferes with
distinct, reasonable investment-backed expectations; and

(d) the character of the measure or the series of measures.

4. A measure of a Party cannot violate this Article unless it expropriates a covered
investment that is a tangible or intangible property right under the domestic law of the
Party in which the investment was made. This determination requires the consideration of
relevant factors, such as the nature and scope of the tangible or intangible property right
under the applicable domestic law of the Party in which the investment was made.

5. The compensation referred to in paragraph | shall:

(a) be paid without delay! in a freely convertible currency of the
expropriating Party’s choice;

(b) be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment
immediately before the expropriation took place (“date of expropriation’).
Appropriate valuation criteria include going concern value, asset value
including the declared tax value of tangible property, and other criteria,
which may be appropriate or relevant under the circumstances, to
determine fair market value;

(c) not reflect any change in value occurring because the intended
expropriation had become known earlier;

(d) include interest at a commercially reasonable rate for that currency
accrued from the date of expropriation until the date of payment; and

(e) be freely transferable.

'l The Parties understand that there may be legal and administrative processes that need to be observed before payment
can be made.

13-8

6. With respect to direct expropriation relating to land, in the case of Indonesia, the
concepts of “public purpose” under paragraph 1 and compensation “equivalent to the fair
market value” under paragraph 5 are implemented in domestic laws and regulations.

7. A measure of a Party that would otherwise constitute an expropriation of an
intellectual property right does not constitute a breach of this Article if it is consistent

with Chapter 14 (Intellectual Property) and the TRIPS Agreement and any waiver or
amendment of the TRIPS Agreement accepted by that Party.

Article 13.11: Transfer of Funds

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers of funds relating to a covered investment to
be made freely, and without delay, into and out of its territory. Those transfers include:

(a) contributions to capital;

(b) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, management
fees, technical assistance fees, and other fees;

(c) proceeds from the sale or liquidation of the whole or part of the covered
investment;

(d) payments made under a contract entered into by the investor or the
covered investment, including payments made pursuant to a loan
agreement;

(e) payments made under Article 13.8 (Treatment in Case of Armed Conflict
or Civil Strife) and Article 13.10 (Expropriation);

(f) earnings and other remuneration of foreign personnel working in
connection with an investment; and

(g) | payments arising out of a dispute.

2. Each Party shall permit transfers of funds relating to a covered investment to be
made in a freely convertible currency at the market rate of exchange in effect at the time
of transfer.

3. A Party shall not require its investors to transfer, or penalise one of its investors
for failing to transfer, the income, earnings, profits, or other amounts derived from, or
attributable to, an investment in the territory of the other Party.
4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1, 2, and 3, a Party may prevent or limit a transfer
through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith application of its domestic law
relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency, or the protection of the rights of a creditor;

(b) issuing, trading, or dealing in securities;

(c) criminal or penal offences;

(d) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers if necessary to assist law
enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;

13-9

(e) ensuring compliance with an order or judgment in judicial or
administrative proceedings;

(f) taxation; or

(g) social security, public retirement, or compulsory savings programmes.

Article 13.12: Performance Requirements

1. A Party shall not, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation, or sale or other disposition of an investment in its
territory, impose or enforce a requirement, or enforce a commitment or undertaking:

(a) to export a given level or percentage of a good or service;
(b) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

(c) to purchase, use, or accord a preference to a good produced or service
provided in its territory, or to purchase a good or service from a person in
its territory;

(d) to relate the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports
or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated with that
investment;

(e) to restrict sales of a good or service in its territory that the investment
produces or provides by relating those sales to the volume or value of its
exports or foreign exchange earnings;

(f) to transfer technology, a production process, source code of software, or
other proprietary knowledge to a person in its territory; or

(g) to supply exclusively from the territory of the Party a good that the
investment produces or a service it provides to a specific regional market
or to the world market.

2. A Party shall not condition the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage, in
connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct,
operation, or sale or other disposition of an investment in its territory, on compliance with
a requirement:

(a) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

(b) to purchase, use, or accord a preference to a good produced in its territory,
or to purchase a good from a producer in its territory;

(c) to relate the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports
or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated with that
investment; or

(d) to restrict sales of a good or service in its territory that the investment

produces or provides by relating those sales to the volume or value of its
exports or foreign exchange earnings.

13-10

The provisions of:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

paragraph 2 do not prevent a Party from conditioning the receipt or
continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with any investments, on
compliance with a requirement to locate production, provide a service,
train or employ workers, construct or expand particular facilities, or carry
out research and development in its territory;

subparagraphs 1(a), 1(b), 1(c), 2(a), and 2(b) do not apply to a
qualification requirement for a good or service with respect to export
promotion and foreign aid programs;

subparagraphs 2(a) and 2(b) do not apply to a requirement imposed by an
importing Party relating to the content of a good necessary to qualify for a
preferential tariff or preferential quota;

subparagraph 1(f) do not apply:

(1) if a Party authorises use of an intellectual property right in
accordance with Article 31!” of the TRIPS Agreement, or to a
measure requiring the disclosure of proprietary information that
falls within the scope of, and is consistent with, Article 39 of the
TRIPS Agreement; or

(11) | if the requirement is imposed or the requirement, commitment, or
undertaking is enforced by a court, administrative tribunal, or
competition authority to remedy an alleged violation of domestic
competition law;

subparagraphs 1(b), 1(c), 1(f), 2(a), and 2(b) do not prevent a Party from
adopting or maintaining a measure to achieve a legitimate public policy
objective, provided that the measure:

(1) is not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction
on trade; and

(11) | does not impose restrictions greater than are required to achieve
the objective; and

subparagraph 1(f) do not preclude a regulatory body or judicial authority
of a Party from requiring a person of the other Party to preserve and make
available the source code of software, or an algorithm expressed in that
source code, to the regulatory body for a specific investigation, inspection,
examination, enforcement action, or judicial proceeding,'* subject to
safeguards against unauthorised disclosure.

'2 The reference to “Article 31” includes any waiver or amendment to the TRIPS Agreement implementing paragraph 6
of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2).

'3 This disclosure shall not be construed to negatively affect the software source code’s status as a trade secret, if such
status is claimed by the trade secret owner.

13-11

Article 13.13: Senior Management and Boards of Directors

1. A Party shall not require that an enterprise of that Party that is a covered
investment appoint to a senior management position an individual of a particular
nationality.

2. A Party may require that up to a majority of the board of directors, or a committee
thereof, of an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment be of a particular
nationality or resident in the territory of the Party, provided that the requirement does not
materially impair the ability of the investor to exercise control over its investment.

3. A Party should encourage enterprises to consider greater diversity in senior
management positions or on their board of directors, which may include a requirement to
nominate women.

Article 13.14: Subrogation

1. If a Party or an agency of a Party makes a payment on non-commercial risks to
one of its investors under a guarantee or a contract of insurance, or other form of
indemnity it has entered into in respect of a covered investment:

(a) the other Party in whose territory the covered investment was made shall
recognise the validity of the subrogation or transfer of any rights the
investor would have possessed with respect to the covered investment but
for the subrogation or transfer; and

(b) the investor shall be precluded from pursuing these rights to the extent of
the subrogation or transfer, unless the other Party or an agency of the other
Party authorises the investor in writing to act on its behalf.

2. The subrogated or transferred right or claim shall not be greater than the original
right or claim of the investor.

Article 13.15: Denial of Benefits

A Party may, at any time prior to its principal submission on the merits, such as
the counter-memorial, in an arbitration under this Chapter, deny the benefits of this
Chapter to an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of that Party and to
investments of that investor if an investor of a non-Party owns or controls the enterprise
and the denying Party:

(a) adopts or maintains a measure with respect to that non-Party or investors
of that non-Party that prohibits transactions with the enterprise or would
be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Agreement were
accorded to the enterprise or to its investment; or

(b) does not maintain diplomatic relations with that non-Party.

13-12

Article 13.16: Special Formalities and Information Requirements

1. Nothing in Article 13.6 (National Treatment) shall be construed to prevent a Party
from adopting or maintaining any measure that prescribes special formalities in
connection with covered investments, such as a requirement that investors be residents of
the Party, that an investor register or otherwise notify the appropriate authorities of its
covered investment, or that covered investments be legally constituted under the laws or
regulations of the Party, provided that these formalities do not materially impair the
protection afforded by the Party to investors of the other Party and covered investments
pursuant to this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding Articles 13.6 (National Treatment) and 13.7 (Most-Favoured-
Nation Treatment), a Party may require an investor of the other Party or a covered
investment to provide information concerning that investment for informational or
statistical purposes. The Party shall protect such information that is confidential from any
disclosure that would prejudice the competitive position of the investor or the covered
investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prevent a Party from
obtaining or disclosing information in connection with the equitable and good faith
application of its law.

Article 13.17: Promotion of Investment

1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperating to promote investment in
priority sectors as a means to effectively achieve economic growth and development
based on common interest and mutual benefits.

2. The cooperation referred to in paragraph | may include:

(a) promoting the principles underlying the obligations contained in this
Chapter to investors;

(b) organising joint investment promotion activities, such as business
matching events or identifying investment opportunities;

(c) organising and supporting the organisation of various briefings and
seminars on investment opportunities and on investment laws, regulations,
and policies; and

(d) conducting information exchanges on other issues of mutual interest
relating to investment promotion.

13-13

Section C: Reservations, Exceptions, Exclusions

Article 13.18: Non-Conforming Measures and Exceptions

1. Article 13.6 (National Treatment), Article 13.7 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment), Article 13.12 (Performance Requirements), Article 13.13 (Senior
Management and Boards of Directors) do not apply to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

any existing non-conforming measure maintained in the territory of a
Party at:

(1) the central level of government, as set out by that Party in its
Schedule to Annex I-A (Reservations for Existing Measures —
ratchet);

(11) | a regional level of government, as set out by that Party in its
Schedule to Annex I-A (Reservations for Existing Measures —
ratchet); or

(i411) | a government other than the central or regional levels;

the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure
referred to in subparagraph (a); or

an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a) to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the
conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the
amendment, with Article 13.6 (National Treatment), Article 13.7 (Most-
Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 13.12 (Performance Requirements),
and Article 13.13 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors).'*

2. Article 13.6 (National Treatment), Article 13.7 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment), Article 13.12 (Performance Requirements) and Article 13.13 (Senior
Management and Boards of Directors) do not apply to:

(a)

(b)

any existing non-conforming measure maintained in the territory of a
Party at:

(1) the central level of government, as set out by that Party in its
Schedule to Annex I-B (Reservations for Existing Measures —
standstill); or

(11) a regional level of government as set out by that Party in its
Schedule to Annex I-B (Reservations for Existing Measures —
standstill);

the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure
referred to in subparagraph (a); or

'4 For greater certainty, only a measure listed in a Party’s Schedule to Annex I-A (Reservations for Existing Measures -
ratchet), or any other measure that becomes subject to paragraph | pursuant to Article 13.19 (Review), is subject to

subparagraph 1(c).

13-14

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a) to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the
conformity of the measure, as it existed at the date of entry into force of
this Agreement, with Article 13.6 (National Treatment), Article 13.7
(Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 13.12 (Performance
Requirements), and Article 13.13 (Senior Management and Boards of
Directors).

3. Article 13.6 (National Treatment), Article 13.7 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment), Article 13.12 (Performance Requirements), and Article 13.13 (Senior
Management and Boards of Directors) shall not apply to a measure that a Party adopts or
maintains with respect to sectors, subsectors, or activities, as set out in its Schedule to
Annex II (Reservations for Future Measures).

4. Notwithstanding subparagraph 2(c), a Party shall not withdraw aright or benefit
from a covered investment, in reliance on which a covered investment has been granted
an investment permit, through an amendment to a limitation on foreign equity
participation that decreases the conformity of the measure as it existed immediately
before the amendment.

5. A Party shall not, under any measure adopted after the date of entry into force of
this Agreement and covered by its Schedule to Annex II (Reservations for Future
Measures), require an investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or
otherwise dispose of an investment existing at the time the measure becomes effective.
For greater certainty, this paragraph does not apply to this requirement if specified in the
initial approval of the investment by the relevant authorities.

6. In respect of intellectual property rights, a Party may derogate from Article 13.6
(National Treatment) and Article 13.7 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) in a manner
that is consistent with:

(a) Article 14.10 (Intellectual Property — National Treatment);

(b) the TRIPS Agreement, if the derogation relates to matters not addressed
by Chapter 14 (Intellectual Property); or

(c) an amendment of or waiver to the TRIPS Agreement in force for both
Parties.

Article 13.19: Review

The Parties shall, three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement
but no later than five years, and every three years thereafter, unless otherwise agreed,
hold consultations to review their respective non-conforming measures referred to in
paragraphs | and 2 of Article 13.18 (Non-Conforming Measures and Exceptions). The
Parties shall, without prejudice to the result, hold these consultations with a view to
increasing the conformity of these non-conforming measures with this Agreement.

Article 13.20: Committee on Investment

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Investment consisting of government
representatives of the Parties.

2. The functions of the Committee on Investment are to:

(a) review the implementation of this Chapter;

13-15

(b) recommend to the Joint Committee, established under Article 23.1
(Administrative and Institutional Provisions — Establishment of the Joint
Committee), to adopt an interpretation of this Agreement pursuant to
Article 13.30 (Applicable Law and Interpretation);

(c) consider any other matters related to this Chapter identified by either
Party;

(d) discuss and coordinate with the Committee on Trade in Services,
established under Article 8.14.1 (Trade in Services — Committee on Trade
in Services), on matters related to this Chapter and to Chapter 8 (Trade in
Services) including with respect to non-conforming measures pursuant to
Article 13.18 (Non-Conforming Measures and Exceptions); and

(e) report to the Joint Committee as required.

Article 13.21: Exclusions

Section D (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) and Chapter 24 (Dispute
Settlement) do not apply to matters set out in Annex 13-A (Exclusions from Dispute
Settlement).

Section D: Investor-State Dispute Settlement

Article 13.22: Scope and Purpose

1. Without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under Chapter 24
(Dispute Settlement), the Parties establish in this Section a mechanism for the settlement
of investment disputes.

2. Under this Section, an investor of a Party may submit a claim that the other Party
has breached an obligation under Section B (Investment Protections), other than

Article 13.5 (Regulatory Objectives), Article 13.12 (Performance Requirements), or
Article 13.13 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors).

Article 13.23: Request for Consultations

1. In the event of an investment dispute under this Agreement, an investor of a Party
shall seek to resolve the dispute through consultations, with a view towards reaching an
amicable settlement. Efforts to reach an amicable settlement may also include the use of
non-binding, third party procedures, such as good offices, conciliation, or mediation.

2. An investor of a Party shall deliver to the other Party a written request for
consultations, which shall specify:

(a) whether the investor intends to claim under paragraph | or 2 of
Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration);

(b) the name and address of the investor and evidence to establish that the
investor is an investor of the other Party;

13-16

(c)

(d)

(e)

the investment at issue and evidence to establish that the investor owns or
controls the investment, including, if the investment is an enterprise, the
name, address, and place of incorporation of the enterprise;

for each claim:
(1) the provision of this Agreement alleged to have been breached; and

(11) the factual basis for the alleged breach, including the measure at
issue; and

the relief sought and the approximate amount of damages claimed.

3. An investor of a Party may, when submitting a request for consultations, propose
to hold the consultations by videoconference, telephone, or similar means of
communication as appropriate. The other Party should give sympathetic consideration to

that request.

4. The request for consultations shall be submitted to the other Party under this
Article no later than:

(a)

(b)

three years from the date on which the investor or, as applicable, the
enterprise referred to in Article 13.25.2 (Submission of a Claim to
Arbitration), first acquired or should have first acquired knowledge of the
alleged breach and knowledge that the investor or, as applicable, the
enterprise, has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that
breach; or

if the investor or, as applicable, the enterprise, has initiated a claim or
proceeding before an administrative tribunal or court under the law of a
Party with respect to the measure at issue in the investor’s request for
consultations delivered pursuant to paragraph 2, two years after:

(1) the investor or, as applicable, the enterprise, ceases to pursue that
claim; or

(11) | when that proceeding has otherwise ended;

provided that it is no later than seven years after the date on which the
investor or, as applicable, the enterprise, first acquired or should have first
acquired knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor
or, as applicable, the enterprise, has incurred loss or damage by reason of,
or arising out of, that breach.

Neither a continuing breach nor the occurrence of similar or related acts or
omissions may renew or interrupt the periods set out in subparagraphs (a) and (b).

5. Unless otherwise agreed, consultations shall be held within 90 days of the
delivery of the request for consultations pursuant to paragraph 2.

6. Unless otherwise agreed, the place of consultations shall be the capital city of the

other Party.

13-17

7. If the investor has not submitted a claim under Article 13.25 (Submission of a
Claim to Arbitration) within one year of the delivery of the request for consultations, the
investor is deemed to have withdrawn its request for consultations and shall not submit a
claim under this Section with respect to the same measure. This period may be extended
by agreement between the investor of a Party and the other Party.

Article 13.24: Mediation

The disputing parties may at any time agree to have recourse to mediation.
Recourse to mediation is without prejudice to the legal position or rights of the disputing
parties under this Section and is governed by the rules agreed to by the disputing parties,
including any applicable rules for mediation adopted by the Joint Committee. If the
disputing parties agree to have recourse to mediation, paragraphs 4 and 7 of Article 13.23
(Request for Consultations) and all timelines pursuant to an arbitration under this Section
are suspended from the date on which the disputing parties agreed to have recourse to
mediation, and shall resume on the date on which either disputing party decides to
terminate the mediation. A decision by a disputing party to terminate the mediation shall
be transmitted by way of letter to the mediator and the other disputing party. Unless
otherwise agreed, expenses incurred in relation to the process under this Article shall be
borne equally by the disputing parties. Each disputing party shall bear its own expenses
derived from the participation in the process.

Article 13.25: Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

1. An investor of a Party may make a claim that the other Party has breached an
obligation in accordance with Article 13.22 (Scope and Purpose), and that the investor
has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach, only if:

(a) the investor has fulfilled the requirements of Article 13.23 (Request for
Consultations);

(b) 180 days have elapsed since the receipt by the other Party of a request for
consultations under Article 13.23 (Request for Consultations);

(c) the claim relates to measures identified in the investor’s request for
consultations under Article 13.23 (Request for Consultations);

(d) the investor consents to dispute settlement in accordance with the
procedures set out in this Agreement; and

13-18

(e) the investor and, if the claim is for loss or damage to an interest in an
enterprise of the other Party that is a juridical person that the investor
owns or controls directly or indirectly, the enterprise, waives its right to
initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under the
law of either Party, or other dispute settlement procedure, any proceeding
with respect to the measure of the other Party that is alleged to be a breach
referred to in Article 13.23.2 (Request for Consultations), except for a
proceeding for injunctive, declaratory, or other extraordinary relief, not
involving the payment of damages, before an administrative tribunal or
court under the law of the other Party.

2. An investor of a Party, on behalf of an enterprise of the other Party that is a
juridical person that the investor owns or controls directly or indirectly, may make a
claim that the other Party has breached an obligation in accordance with Article 13.22
(Scope and Purpose), and that the enterprise has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or
arising out of, that breach, only if:

(a) the investor has fulfilled the requirements of Article 13.23 (Request for
Consultations);

(b) 180 days have elapsed since the receipt by the other Party of a request for
consultations under Article 13.23 (Request for Consultations);

(c) the claim relates to measures identified in the investor’s request for
consultations under Article 13.23 (Request for Consultations);

(d) the investor consents to dispute settlement in accordance with the
procedures set out in this Agreement; and

(e) both the investor and the enterprise waive their right to initiate or continue
before an administrative tribunal or court under the law of either Party, or
other dispute settlement procedure, any proceeding with respect to the
measure of the other Party that is alleged to be a breach referred to in
Article 13.23.2 (Request for Consultations), except for a proceeding for
injunctive, declaratory, or other extraordinary relief, not involving the
payment of damages, before an administrative tribunal or court under the
law of the other Party.

3. A consent and waiver required by this Article shall be in writing, shall be
delivered to the respondent Party, and shall be included in the submission of a claim to
arbitration.

4. Notwithstanding paragraph 3, a waiver from the enterprise under paragraph 1(e)
or 2(e) is not required if the other Party has deprived the investor of control of the
enterprise.

5. If an investor of a Party makes a claim under paragraph 2 and the investor or a
non-controlling investor in the enterprise makes a claim under paragraph 1 arising out of
the same events or circumstances, and two or more of the claims are submitted to dispute
settlement under this Article, the claims should be heard together by a Tribunal
constituted under Article 13.32 (Consolidation), unless the Tribunal finds that the
interests of a disputing party would be prejudiced thereby.

13-19

6. An investor of a Party may submit a claim to dispute settlement under:

(a) the ICSID Convention, provided that both Parties are parties to the ICSID
Convention;

(b) the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, if only one Party is a party to the
ICSID Convention;

(c) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; or
(d) any other rules on agreement of the disputing parties.

7. Except to the extent modified by this Agreement, the arbitration shall be governed
by the arbitration rules applicable under paragraph 6 that are in effect on the date that the
claim is submitted to dispute settlement under this Article.

8. If the claimant proposes rules pursuant to subparagraph 6(d), the respondent Party
shall reply to the claimant’s proposal within 45 days of receipt of the proposal. If the
disputing parties have not agreed on those rules within 60 days of receipt, the claimant
may submit a claim under the rules provided for in subparagraph 6(a), 6(b), or 6(c).

9. A claim is submitted to arbitration under this Article when:

(a) the request for arbitration under Article 36(1) of the ICSID Convention is
received by the Secretary-General of ICSID;

(b) the request for arbitration under Article 2 of Schedule C of the ICSID
Additional Facility Rules is received by the Secretariat of ICSID; or

(c) the notice of arbitration under Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules is received by the respondent Party.

Article 13.26: Consent to Arbitration

1. Each Party consents to the submission of a claim to arbitration under this Section
in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, including the requirements of
Article 13.23 (Request for Consultations) and Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to
Arbitration).

2. The consent under paragraph | and the submission of a claim to arbitration under
Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) shall satisfy the requirement of:

(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and the
ICSID Additional Facility Rules for written consent of the parties to the
dispute;

(b) Article II of the New York Convention for an “agreement in writing”.

13-20

Article 13.27: Discontinuance

If the claimant fails to take a step in the proceeding within 180 days of the
submission of a claim to arbitration under Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to
Arbitration), or such other time period as agreed to by the disputing parties, the claimant
is deemed to have withdrawn its claim and to have discontinued the proceeding. The
Tribunal, if constituted, shall, at the request of the respondent Party, and after notice to
the disputing parties, in an order take note of the discontinuance. After the order has been
rendered the authority of the Tribunal shall cease.

Article 13.28: Arbitrators

1. Except in respect of a Tribunal established under Article 13.32 (Consolidation),
and unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the Tribunal shall be composed of three
arbitrators. Each disputing party shall appoint one arbitrator, and the third arbitrator, who
will be the presiding arbitrator, shall be appointed by agreement of, or pursuant to an
appointment process agreed to by, the disputing parties. The disputing parties are
encouraged to consider greater diversity in arbitrator appointments, including through the
appointment of women.

2. Arbitrators should have expertise or experience in public international law,
international investment law, or international trade law, or dispute resolution arising
under international investment or international trade agreements.

3. Arbitrators shall be independent of, and not be affiliated with or take instructions
from, a Party or the disputing investor.

4. If the disputing parties do not agree on the remuneration of the arbitrators before
the Tribunal is constituted, the prevailing ICSID rate for arbitrators shall apply.

5. If a Tribunal, other than a Tribunal established under Article 13.32
(Consolidation), has not been constituted within 90 days of the submission of a claim to
arbitration, a disputing party may ask the Secretary-General of ICSID to appoint the
arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed. In accordance with this Article, the Secretary-
General of ICSID shall make the appointment at his or her own discretion and, to the
extent practicable, shall make this appointment in consultation with the disputing parties.
The Secretary-General of ICSID shall not appoint as presiding arbitrator a national of a
Party.

6. Arbitrators shall abide by the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law (UNCITRAL) Code of Conduct for Arbitrators in International Investment Dispute
Resolution adopted on 7 July 2023, as modified by this Article.

7. Upon appointment, an arbitrator shall refrain, for the duration of the proceeding,
or any time thereafter to the extent it would amount to a breach of the arbitrator’s duty of
independence and impartiality, from acting as counsel or party-appointed expert or
witness in any pending or new investment dispute under this Agreement or any other
international investment treaty.

13-21

Article 13.29: Agreement to Appointment of Arbitrators by ICSID

For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of
Schedule C to the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to an objection
to an arbitrator based on a ground other than nationality:

(a) the respondent Party agrees to the appointment of each individual member
of a Tribunal established under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID
Additional Facility Rules;

(b) an investor of a Party referred to in Article 13.25.1 (Submission of a
Claim to Arbitration) may submit a claim to arbitration or continue a claim
under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules only
if the investor agrees in writing to the appointment of each member of the
Tribunal; and

(c) an investor of a Party referred to in Article 13.25.2 (Submission of a
Claim to Arbitration) may submit a claim to arbitration or continue a claim
under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules only
if the investor and the enterprise agree in writing to the appointment of
each member of the Tribunal.

Article 13.30: Applicable Law and Interpretation

I. A Tribunal constituted under this Section shall apply this Agreement as
interpreted in accordance with the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, done at
Vienna on 23 May 1969, and other rules and principles of international law applicable
between the Parties.

2. If serious concerns arise as regards matters of interpretation of this Chapter, the
Committee on Investment may recommend, pursuant to Article 13.20.2(b) (Committee
on Investment), that the Joint Committee may adopt an interpretation of this Agreement
which shall be binding on a Tribunal established under this Section.

3. A Tribunal has no jurisdiction to determine the legality of a measure, alleged to
constitute a breach of this Chapter, under the domestic law of a Party. In determining the
consistency of a measure with this Chapter, the Tribunal may consider, as appropriate,
the domestic law of a Party as a matter of fact. In doing so, the Tribunal shall follow the
prevailing interpretation given to the domestic law by the courts or authorities of that
Party, and any meaning given to domestic law by the Tribunal is not binding on the
courts or authorities of that Party.

4. If an investor of a Party submits a claim to arbitration under Article 13.25
(Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), including a claim that a Party breached

Article 13.9 (Minimum Standard of Treatment), the investor has the burden of proving all
elements of its claim, consistent with the general principles of international law
applicable to international arbitration.

13-22

Article 13.31: Preliminary Objections

1. Without prejudice to a Tribunal’s authority to address other questions as a
preliminary objection, a Tribunal shall address and decide as a preliminary question an
objection by the respondent Party that, as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a
claim for which an award in favour of the investor may be made under this Agreement,
including that a dispute is not within the competence of the Tribunal, or that a claim is
manifestly without legal merit.

2. An objection under paragraph 1 shall be submitted to the Tribunal within 60 days
of constitution of the Tribunal. The Tribunal shall suspend any proceeding on the merits
and issue a decision or award on the objection, stating the grounds therefor, within

180 days of the objection. However, if a disputing party requests a hearing, the Tribunal
may take an additional 30 days to issue the decision or award. Regardless of whether a
disputing party requests a hearing, a Tribunal may, on a showing of extraordinary cause,
delay issuing its decision or award by an additional brief period, which may not exceed
30 days.

3. When deciding an objection under paragraph 1, the Tribunal shall assume to be
true the factual allegations in the claim to arbitration under Article 13.25 (Submission of
a Claim to Arbitration), or any amendment to that claim. The Tribunal may also consider
relevant facts not in dispute.

4. Whether or not a respondent Party raises an objection under paragraph |
concerning the competence of the Tribunal, the respondent Party shall have the right to
raise, and the Tribunal the authority to address and decide, a question pertaining to its
competence in the course of the proceedings.

5. The provisions on costs in Article 13.39.3 (Final Award) shall apply to decisions
or awards issued under this Article.

Article 13.32: Consolidation

1. If two or more claims have been submitted separately to arbitration under
Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) and the claims have a question of
law or fact in common and arise out of the same events or circumstances, a disputing
party may seek a consolidation order in accordance with the agreement of all the
disputing parties sought to be covered by the order or the terms of paragraphs 2
through 10.

2. A disputing party that seeks a consolidation order under this Article shall deliver,
in writing, a request to the Secretary-General of ICSID to establish a Tribunal and shall
specify in the request:

(a) the name of the respondent Party, or the investors, against which the order
is sought;

(b) the nature of the order sought; and
(c) the grounds for the order sought.

3. The disputing party shall deliver a copy of the request to the respondent Party, or
the investors, against which the order is sought.

13-23

4. Unless the disputing parties sought to be covered by the order agree to a different
appointment process, the Secretary-General of ICSID shall, within 60 days of receiving
the request, establish a Tribunal composed of three arbitrators. The Secretary-General of
ICSID shall appoint one member who is a national of the respondent Party, one member
who is a national of the Party of the investors that submitted the claims, and a presiding
arbitrator who is not a national of a Party.

5. A Tribunal established under this Article shall be established under the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and shall conduct its proceedings in accordance with the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, except as modified by this Section.

6. If a Tribunal established under this Article is satisfied that the claims submitted to
arbitration under Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) have a question of
law or fact in common, the Tribunal may, in the interest of fair and efficient resolution of
the claims and after hearing the disputing parties, by order:

(a) assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine together, all or part of
the claims; or

(b) assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine one or more of the
claims, the determination of which it believes would assist in resolving the
other claims.

7. If a Tribunal has been established under this Article, an investor that has
submitted a claim to arbitration under Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to
Arbitration) and that has not been named in a request made under paragraph 2 may make
a written request to the Tribunal that it be included in an order made under paragraph 6.
The request shall specify:

(a) the name and address of the investor;
(b) the nature of the order sought; and
(c) the grounds on which the order is sought.

8. An investor referred to in paragraph 7 shall deliver a copy of its request to the
disputing parties named in a request under paragraph 1.

9. A Tribunal established under Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration)
does not have jurisdiction to decide a claim, or a part of a claim, over which a Tribunal
established under this Article has assumed jurisdiction.

10. On application of a disputing party, a Tribunal established under this Article,
pending its decision under paragraph 6, may order that the proceedings of a Tribunal
established under Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) be stayed unless
the latter Tribunal has already adjourned its proceedings.

Article 13.33: Seat of Arbitration

The disputing parties may agree on the seat of arbitration under the arbitration
rules applicable under Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) or
Article 13.32 (Consolidation). If the disputing parties fail to agree, the Tribunal shall
determine the seat of arbitration in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules,
provided that the legal seat of arbitration shall be in the territory of a State that is a party
to the New York Convention.

13-24

Article 13.34: Transparency of Proceedings

1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 4, the respondent Party shall, after receiving the
following documents, promptly transmit them to the non-disputing Party and make them
available to the public:

(a) a claim submitted pursuant to Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to
Arbitration);

(b) pleadings, memorials, briefs, and other submissions made to the Tribunal
by a disputing party;

(c) minutes or transcripts of hearings of the Tribunal, if available; and
(d) orders, awards, and decisions of the Tribunal.

2. The Tribunal shall conduct hearings open to the public and shall determine, in
consultation with the disputing parties, the appropriate logistical arrangements. If a
disputing party intends to use information in a hearing that is designated as confidential
information or otherwise subject to paragraph 3, it shall so advise the Tribunal. The
Tribunal shall make appropriate arrangements to protect such information from
disclosure which may include closing the hearing for the duration of the discussion of
that information.

3. Nothing in this Section, requires a respondent Party to make available to the
public or otherwise disclose during or after the arbitral proceedings, including the
hearing, confidential information, or to furnish or allow access to information that it may
withhold in accordance with Article 25.3 (Exceptions and General Provisions — National
Security) or Article 25.8 (Exceptions and General Provisions — Disclosure of Information
and Confidentiality).

4. Any confidential information that is submitted to the Tribunal shall be protected
from disclosure in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) subject to subparagraph (d), neither the disputing parties nor the Tribunal
shall disclose to a non-disputing Party or to the public any confidential
information if the disputing party that provided the information clearly
designates it in accordance with subparagraph (b);

(b) any disputing party claiming that certain information constitutes
confidential information shall clearly designate the information according
to any schedule set by the Tribunal;

(c) a disputing party shall, according to any schedule set by the Tribunal,
submit a redacted version of the document that does not contain the
confidential information. Only the redacted version shall be disclosed in
accordance with paragraph 1; and

(d) the Tribunal, subject to paragraph 3, shall decide any objection regarding
the designation of information claimed to be confidential information.

5. Nothing in this Section requires a respondent Party to withhold from the public
information required to be disclosed by its law. The respondent Party should endeavour
to apply those laws in a manner sensitive to protecting from disclosure information that
has been designated as confidential information.

13-25

6. A disputing party may disclose to other persons in connection with the
proceedings, including witnesses and experts, unredacted documents that it considers
necessary to disclose in the course of proceedings under this Section. However, the
disputing party shall ensure that those persons protect the confidential information in
those documents as directed by the Tribunal.

7. A Party may disclose to government officials and officials of a government other
than at the central level, if applicable, unredacted documents that it considers necessary
to disclose in the course of proceedings under this Section. However, that Party shall
ensure that those persons protect the confidential information in those documents as
directed by the Tribunal.

Article 13.35: Participation of a Non-Disputing Party

1. The Tribunal shall accept or, after consultation with the disputing parties, may
invite oral or written submissions from the non-disputing Party regarding the
interpretation of this Agreement. The non-disputing Party may attend a hearing held
under this Section.

2. The Tribunal shall not draw any inference from the absence of a submission
pursuant to paragraph 1.

3. The Tribunal shall ensure that the disputing parties are given a reasonable
opportunity to present their observations on a submission by the non-disputing Party.

Article 13.36: Expert Reports

Without prejudice to the appointment of other kinds of experts if authorised by
the applicable arbitration rules, the Tribunal may, at the request of a disputing party or,
unless the disputing parties disapprove, on its own initiative, appoint one or more experts
to report to it in writing on any factual issue, including the rights of Indigenous Peoples’
or scientific matters raised by a disputing party in a proceeding, subject to any terms and
conditions agreed on by the disputing parties.

Article 13.37: Interim Measures of Protection

A Tribunal may order an interim measure of protection to preserve the rights of a
disputing party or to ensure that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is made fully effective,
including an order to preserve evidence in the possession or control of a disputing party
or to protect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. A Tribunal shall not order attachment or enjoin
the application of the measure alleged to constitute a breach referred to in Article 13.25
(Submission of a Claim to Arbitration). For the purposes of this paragraph, an order
includes a recommendation.

'S Indigenous Peoples refers to:

(a) for Canada, Aboriginal peoples (including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples) as defined in
subsection 35(2) of the Constitution Act, 1982 of Canada;
(b) for Indonesia, Masyarakat Hukum Adat in accordance with Indonesia’s laws and regulations.

13-26

Article 13.38: Security for Costs

1. At the request of a disputing party, the Tribunal may order the other disputing
party to provide security for all or part of the costs, if there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there is a risk the disputing party may not be able to honour a potential costs
award against it.

2. In determining whether to order a disputing party to provide security for costs, the
Tribunal shall consider all relevant circumstances, including:

(a) that disputing party’s ability to comply with an adverse decision on costs;

(b) that disputing party’s willingness to comply with an adverse decision on
costs;

(c) the effect that providing security for costs may have on that disputing
party’s ability to pursue its claim or counterclaim; and

(d) the conduct of the disputing parties.

3. The Tribunal shall consider all evidence adduced in relation to the circumstances
in paragraph 2, including the existence of third party funding.

4. The Tribunal shall specify any relevant terms in an order to provide security for
costs and shall fix a time limit of 30 days for compliance with the order, or within any
other time period set by the Tribunal.

5. If a disputing party fails to comply with an order to provide security for costs, the
Tribunal may suspend the proceeding. If the proceeding 1s suspended for more than

90 days, the Tribunal may, after consulting with the disputing parties, order the
discontinuance of the proceeding.

6. A disputing party shall promptly disclose any material change in the
circumstances upon which the Tribunal ordered security for costs.

7. The Tribunal may at any time modify or revoke its order on security for costs, on
its Own initiative or upon a disputing party’s request.

Article 13.39: Final Award

1. If a Tribunal makes a final award against the respondent Party, in respect of its
finding of liability, the Tribunal may award, separately or in combination, only:

(a) monetary damages and any applicable interest; and
(b) restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that the

respondent Party may pay monetary damages and any applicable interest
in lieu of restitution.

13-27

2. Subject to paragraph 1, if a claim is made under Article 13.25.2 (Submission of a
Claim to Arbitration):

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

an award of monetary damages and any applicable interest shall provide
that the sum be paid to the enterprise;

an award of restitution of property shall provide that restitution be made to
the enterprise;

an award of costs in favour of the investor shall provide that the sum be
paid to the investor; and

the award shall provide that it is made without prejudice to a right that a
person, other than a person which has provided a waiver pursuant to
Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), may have in
monetary damages or property awarded under a Party’s domestic law.

3. The Tribunal shall make an order with respect to the costs of the arbitration,
which shall in principle be borne by the unsuccessful disputing party or parties. In
determining the appropriate apportionment of costs, the Tribunal shall consider all
relevant circumstances, including:

(a) the outcome of any part of the proceeding, including the number or extent
of the successful parts of the claims or defences;
(b) the disputing parties’ conduct during the proceeding, including the extent
to which they acted in an expeditious and cost-effective manner;
(c) the complexity of the issues; and
(d) the reasonableness of the costs claimed.
4. The Tribunal and the disputing parties shall make every effort to ensure the

dispute settlement process is carried out in a timely manner. The Tribunal shall issue its
final award within 12 months of the final date of the hearing on the merits. It may, with
good cause and notice to the disputing parties, delay issuing its final award by an
additional brief period.

5. Monetary damages in an award:
(a) shall not be greater than the loss or damage incurred by the investor, or, as
applicable, by the enterprise referred to in Article 13.25.2 (Submission of
a Claim to Arbitration), as valued on the date of the breach;!°
(b) shall only reflect loss or damage incurred by reason of, or arising out of,
the breach; and
(c) shall be determined with reasonable certainty, and shall not be speculative

or hypothetical.

'6 In the case of a breach of Article 13.10 (Expropriation), the valuation of the loss or damage incurred by the investor,
or, as applicable, by the enterprise referred to in Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), as valued on the
date of the breach, shall be made in accordance with Article 13.10.5.

13-28

6. In making an award under paragraph 5, the Tribunal shall calculate monetary
damages based only on the submissions of the disputing parties, and shall consider, as
applicable:

(a) contributory fault, whether deliberate or negligent;

(b) failure to mitigate damages;

(c) prior damages or compensation received for the same loss; or
(d) restitution of property, or repeal, or modification of the measure.

7. The Tribunal may award monetary damages for lost future profits only insofar as
such damages satisfy the requirements under paragraph 5. Such determination requires a
case-by-case, fact-based inquiry that takes into consideration, among other factors,
whether a covered investment has been in operation in the territory of the respondent
Party for a sufficient period of time to establish a performance record of profitability.

8. The Tribunal shall not award punitive damages.

9. The Tribunal shall not award monetary damages under Article 13.25.1
(Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) for loss or damage incurred by the investment.

Article 13.40: Finality and Enforcement of an Award

1. An award made by a Tribunal has no binding force except between the disputing
parties and in respect of that particular case.

2. Subject to paragraph 3 and the applicable review procedure for an interim award,
a disputing party shall abide by and comply with an award without delay.

3. A disputing party shall not seek enforcement of a final award until:
(a) in the case of a final award made under the ICSID Convention:

(1) 120 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered
provided that a disputing party has not requested the award be
revised or annulled; or

(11) revision or annulment proceedings have been completed; and

(b) in the case of a final award under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules or
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules:

(1) 90 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no
disputing party has commenced a proceeding to revise, set aside, or

annul the award; or

(11) a court has dismissed or allowed an application to revise, set aside,
or annul the award, and there is no further appeal.

13-29

4. Each Party shall provide for the enforcement of an award in its territory.

5. A claim submitted to arbitration under Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to
Arbitration) shall be considered to arise out of a commercial relationship or transaction
for the purposes of Article I of the New York Convention.

Article 13.41: Third Party Funding

1. A claimant benefiting from a third party funding arrangement shall disclose to the
respondent Party and to the Tribunal the name and address of the third party funder.

2. The claimant shall make the disclosure under paragraph | at the time of the
submission of a claim to arbitration under Article 13.25 (Submission of a Claim to
Arbitration), or, if the third party funding is arranged after the submission of a claim,
within 10 days of the date on which the third party funding was arranged.

3. The claimant shall have a continuing obligation to disclose any changes to the

information referred to in paragraph | occurring after its initial disclosure, including
termination of the third party funding arrangement.

Article 13.42: Service of Documents

1. Delivery of notice and other documents to a Party shall be made to:
For Indonesia: Director General for Legal Affairs and International Treaties,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Jalan Taman Pejambon

No.6 Jakarta 10110 Indonesia.

For Canada: Office of the Assistant Deputy Attorney General of Canada,
50 O’Connor Street, Sth Floor, Ottawa, Ontario K1A OHB.

2. A Party shall promptly make publicly available and notify the other Party of any
change to the place referred to in paragraph 1.

Article 13.43: Receipts under Insurance or Guarantee Contracts

In an arbitration under this Section, a respondent Party may not assert as a
defence, counterclaim, right of set-off, or otherwise, that the claimant has received or will
receive, under an insurance or guarantee contract, indemnification or other compensation
for all or part of its alleged damages.

13-30

CHAPTER 14

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

Section A: General Provisions

Article 14.1: Definitions
1. For the purposes of this Chapter:

Berne Convention means the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works, as revised at Paris on 24 July 1971;

Budapest Treaty means the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the
Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure (1977), done at
Budapest on 28 April 1977, as amended on 26 September 1980;

counterfeit geographical indication goods means goods, including packaging, bearing
without authorisation, a geographical indication which is identical to the geographical
indication validly registered or otherwise protected in respect of those goods and which
infringes the rights of the right holder of the geographical indication in question under the
law of the Party providing the procedures under Section J (Enforcement of Intellectual
Property Rights);

counterfeit trademark goods means goods, including packaging, bearing without
authorisation a trademark that is identical to the trademark validly registered in respect of
those goods, or that cannot be distinguished in its essential aspects from the trademark,
and that thereby infringes the rights of the owner of the trademark in question under the
law of the Party providing the procedures under Section J (Enforcement of Intellectual
Property Rights);

Doha Declaration means the Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health,
adopted at Doha on 14 November 2001;

geographical indication means an indication that identifies a good as originating in the
territory of a Party, or a region or locality in that territory, where a given quality,
reputation, or other characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to its geographical
origin;

Hague Agreement means the Geneva Act of the Hague Agreement Concerning the
International Registration of Industrial Designs, done at Geneva on 2 July 1999;

intellectual property refers to all categories of intellectual property that are the subject
of Sections | through 7 of Part II of the TRIPS Agreement;

Madrid Protocol means the Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the
International Registration of Marks, done at Madrid on 27 June 1989;

with respect to the misappropriation of a trade secret, manner contrary to honest

commercial practices means at least practices such as breach of contract, breach of
confidence, and inducement to breach;

14-]

Marrakesh Treaty means the Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works
for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired or Otherwise Print Disabled, done at
Marrakesh on 27 June 2013;

with respect to a trade secret, misappropriation means the acquisition, use, or disclosure
of a trade secret in a manner contrary to honest commercial practices, including the
acquisition, use, or disclosure of a trade secret by a third party that knew, or ought to
have known, that the trade secret was acquired, used, or disclosed in a manner contrary to
honest commercial practices.! Misappropriation does not include situations in which a
person:

(a) reverse engineered an item lawfully obtained;

(b) independently discovered information claimed as a trade secret; or

(c) acquired the subject information from another person in a legitimate
manner without an obligation of confidentiality or knowledge that the
information was a trade secret;

Nice Agreement means the Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classification
of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks, done at Nice
on 15 June 1957, as revised and amended on 28 September 1979;

Paris Convention means the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property,
done at Paris on 20 March 1883 as revised at Stockholm on 14 July 1967;

Patent Cooperation Treaty means the Patent Cooperation Treaty, done at Washington
on 19 June 1970, as amended on 28 September 1979, and modified on 3 February 1984
and on 3 October 2001;

Patent Law Treaty means the Patent Law Treaty, done at Geneva on | June 2000;
performance means a performance fixed in a phonogram unless otherwise specified;

pirated copyright goods means goods that are copies made without the consent of the
right holder or person duly authorised by the right holder in the country of production and
that are made directly or indirectly from an article where the making of that copy would
have constituted an infringement of a copyright or a related right under the law of the
Party providing the procedures under Section J (Enforcement of Intellectual Property
Rights);

protection of intellectual property includes matters affecting the availability,
acquisition, scope, maintenance and enforcement of intellectual property rights as well as
those matters affecting the use of intellectual property rights specifically addressed in this
Chapter;

Rome Convention means the International Convention for the Protection of Performers,
Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting organisations, done at Rome
on 26 October 1961;

Singapore Treaty means the Singapore Treaty on the Law of Trademarks, done at
Singapore on 27 March 2006;

' For greater certainty, “misappropriation” as defined in this paragraph includes cases in which the acquisition, use, or
disclosure involves a computer system.

14-2

trade secret means information? that:

(a) is secret in the sense that it is not, as a body or in the precise configuration
and assembly of its components, generally known among or readily
accessible to persons within the circles that normally deal with the kind of
information in question;

(b) has actual or potential commercial value because it is secret; and

(c) has been subject to reasonable steps under the circumstances, by the
person lawfully in control of the information, to keep it secret;

The TRIPS/health solution means, collectively, the Decision of the WTO General
Council of 30 August 2003 on the Implementation of Paragraph Six of the Doha
Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health (WT/L/540) and the WTO
General Council Chairman’s Statement Accompanying the Decision (JOB(03)/177,
WT/GC/M/82), as well as the Decision of the WTO General Council of

6 December 2005 on the Amendment of the TRIPS Agreement (WT/L/641), and the WTO
General Council Chairperson’s Statement Accompanying the Decision (JOB(05)/319 and
Corr. 1,WT/GC/M/100);

UPOV 1991 means the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of
Plants, done at Paris on 2 December 1961, as revised at Geneva on 19 March 1991;

WCT means the WIPO Copyright Treaty, done at Geneva on 20 December 1996;
WIPO means the World Intellectual Property organisation;
work includes a cinematographic work, photographic work, and computer program; and

WPPT means the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty, done at Geneva
on 20 December 1996.

2. For the purposes of Article 14.10 (National Treatment), Article 14.11
(Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), and Article 14.35. (Procedures for the Protection of
Geographical Indications):

with respect to the relevant right, a national means a person of a Party that would meet

the criteria for eligibility for protection provided for in the agreements referred to in
Article 14.9 (International Agreements).

> For greater certainty, “information” includes written or unwritten information.

14-3

Article 14.2: Objectives
1. The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) achieve an adequate and effective level of protection and enforcement of
intellectual property with a view, among other things, to eliminating trade
in goods infringing intellectual property rights while ensuring that
measures to protect and enforce intellectual property do not themselves
become barriers to legitimate trade;

(b) facilitate international trade and contribute to economic, social, and
cultural development through the production and commercialisation of
innovative and creative products and services, the transfer and
dissemination of technology, and the creation of a sound and viable
technological base; and

(c) maintain a balance between the rights of intellectual property right holders
and the legitimate interests of intellectual property users with regard to
intellectual property.

2. The Parties recognise the importance of:
(a) promoting innovation and creativity;

(b) facilitating the diffusion of information, knowledge, technology, culture,
and the arts; and

(c) fostering competition and open and efficient markets,

through their respective intellectual property systems, while respecting the
principles of transparency and due process, and taking into account the interests
of relevant stakeholders, including right holders, intermediaries, users, and the
public.

Article 14.3: Principles

1. A Party may adopt measures necessary to protect public health and nutrition, and
to promote the public interest in sectors of vital importance to their socio-economic and
technological development, provided that such measures are consistent with the
provisions of this Chapter.

2. Appropriate measures, provided that they are consistent with the provisions of this
Chapter, may be needed to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights by right
holders or the resort to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the
international transfer of technology.

Article 14.4: Nature and Scope of Obligations

Each Party shall give effect to the provisions of this Chapter. A Party may, but
shall not be obliged to, provide more extensive protection for, or enforcement of,
intellectual property rights under its law than is required by this Chapter, provided that
such protection or enforcement does not contravene the provisions of this Chapter. Each
Party shall be free to determine the appropriate method of implementing the provisions of
this Chapter within its own legal system and practice.

14-4

Article 14.5: Exhaustion of Intellectual Property Rights

Nothing in this Agreement prevents a Party from determining whether or under
what conditions the exhaustion of intellectual property rights applies under its legal

3
system.

Article 14.6: Public Domain
1. The Parties recognise the importance of a rich and accessible public domain.

2. The Parties acknowledge the importance of publicly accessible databases of
registered intellectual property rights to assist in the identification of subject matter that
has fallen into the public domain.

Article 14.7: Application of Chapter to Existing Subject Matter and Prior Acts

1. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, this Chapter gives rise to obligations in
respect of all subject matter existing at the date of entry into force of this Agreement and
that is protected on that date in the territory of a Party where protection is claimed, or that
meets or comes subsequently to meet the criteria for protection under this Chapter.

2. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, a Party shall not be required to restore
protection to subject matter that on the date of entry into force of this Agreement has
fallen into the public domain in its territory.

3. This Chapter does not give rise to obligations in respect of acts that occurred
before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 14.8: Public Health Measures

1. The Parties affirm their commitment to the Doha Declaration. In particular, the
Parties have reached the following understandings regarding this Chapter:

(a) The obligations of this Chapter do not and should not prevent a Party from
taking measures to protect public health. Accordingly, while reiterating
their commitment to this Chapter, the Parties affirm that this Chapter can
and should be interpreted and implemented in a manner supportive of each
Party’s right to protect public health and, in particular, to promote access
to medicines for all and to take measures to limit or discourage the use of
tobacco or tobacco-related products. Each Party has the right to determine
what constitutes a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme
urgency, it being understood that public health crises, including those
relating to epidemics, such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria, can
represent a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme
urgency;

3 For greater certainty, this Article is without prejudice to any provisions addressing the exhaustion of intellectual
property rights in international agreements to which a Party is a party.

14-5

(b) In recognition of the commitment to access to medicines that are supplied
in accordance with the TRIPS/health solution, this Chapter does not and
should not prevent the effective utilisation of the TRIPS/health solution;
and

(c) With respect to the aforementioned matters, if any waiver of any provision
of the TRIPS Agreement, or any amendment of the TRIPS Agreement,
enters into force with respect to the Parties, and a Party’s application of a
measure in conformity with that waiver or amendment is contrary to the
obligations of this Chapter, the Parties shall immediately consult to
consider adapting this Chapter as appropriate in the light of the waiver or
amendment.

2. The Parties welcome the 23 January 2017 entry into force of the Protocol
Amending the TRIPS Agreement, pursuant to the Decision of the WTO General Council
of 30 August 2003 on Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration, and shall contribute to the
implementation of and respect for the Protocol Amending the TRIPS Agreement.

Article 14.9: International Agreements
1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the TRIPS Agreement.
2. Each Party affirms that it has ratified or acceded to the following agreements:
(a) Berne Convention;
(b) Budapest Treaty;
(c) Madrid Protocol;
(d) Marrakesh Treaty;
(e) Nice Agreement;
(f) Paris Convention;
(g) Patent Cooperation Treaty;
(h) WCT; and
(i) WPPT.

3. Each Party shall make all reasonable efforts to ratify or accede to each of the
following agreements, if it is not already a party to that agreement:

(a) Hague Agreement; and
(b) Singapore Treaty.

4. The Parties shall exchange information on their respective progress regarding the
ratification or accession to the agreements referred to in Paragraph 3.

5. Each Party shall consider ratifying or acceding to UPOV 19914, if it is not already
a Party to that agreement.

4 A Party’s ratification or accession to UPOV 1991 is without prejudice to its rights to protect local plant varieties.

14-6

Article 14.10: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to nationals of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords to its own nationals with regard to the protection of
intellectual property covered in this Chapter, subject to the exceptions, exemptions, and
flexibilities provided for in the TRIPS Agreement and in multilateral agreements
concluded or administered under the auspices of WIPO.

2. For greater certainty, a Party may avail itself of the exceptions referred to in
paragraph | in relation to its judicial and administrative procedures, including requiring a
national of the other Party to designate an address for service in its territory, or to appoint
an agent in its territory, only where such exceptions are:

(a) necessary to secure compliance with its laws and regulations that are not
inconsistent with this Chapter; and

(b) not applied in a manner that would constitute a disguised restriction on
trade.

3. For greater certainty, the obligations under paragraph | do not apply to
procedures provided in multilateral agreements concluded under the auspices of WIPO
relating to the acquisition or maintenance of intellectual property rights.

Article 14.11: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

Each Party shall immediately and unconditionally accord to nationals of the other
Party any advantage, favour, privilege, or immunity granted by it to the nationals of a
non-Party with regard to the protection of intellectual property, subject to the exceptions,
exemptions, and flexibilities provided for in the TRIPS Agreement and in multilateral
agreements concluded or administered under the auspices of WIPO.

Article 14.12: Transparency

1. Further to Article 22.2 (Transparency, Anti-Corruption, and Responsible Business
Conduct — Publication) and Article 14.76 (Enforcement Practices with Respect to
Intellectual Property Rights), each Party shall endeavour to make available on a
government website its laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative rulings of
general application concerning the protection and enforcement of intellectual property
rights, and in a manner that enables the public to become acquainted with them.

2. Each Party shall, subject to its law, endeavour to make available on a government
website information that it makes public concerning applications for trademarks,
geographical indications, designs, patents, and plant variety rights.> ©

> For greater certainty, paragraphs 2 and 3 are without prejudice to a Party’s obligations under Article 14.28 (Electronic
Trademarks System).

6 For greater certainty, paragraph 2 does not require a Party to make available on the government website the entire
dossier for the relevant application.

14-7

3. Each Party shall, subject to its law, make available on a government website
information that it makes public concerning registered or granted trademarks,
geographical indications, designs, patents, and plant variety rights, sufficient to enable
the other Party or any interested person to become acquainted with those registered or
granted rights. ’

Section B: Cooperation

Article 14.13: Committee on Intellectual Property

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Intellectual Property (the
Committee) composed of representatives of each Party, including representatives with
expertise in intellectual property.

2. The Committee shall be co-chaired by a representative of each Party. The
Co-Chairs shall also act as Contact Points to facilitate communications between the
Parties on matters relevant to this Chapter and other intellectual property matters.

3. The Committee shall meet as mutually decided by the Parties. Committee
meetings may be held in person or by any technological means decided by the Parties.

4. The Parties may decide to invite independent experts to attend Committee
meetings, as appropriate.

5. The Committee shall:

(a) discuss topics relevant to the protection and enforcement of intellectual
property rights covered by this Chapter, and any other relevant issue as
decided by the Parties;

(b) — provide a forum for consultations pursuant to Article 14.8(1)(c) (Public
Health Measures) and Article 14.101 (Technical Consultations); and

(c) oversee the Parties’ cooperation under this Chapter.

6. Members of the Committee may attend, by invitation, meetings of other
committees established under this Agreement.

Article 14.14: Cooperation in the Field of Intellectual Property

The Parties shall endeavour to increase opportunities for cooperation in the field
of intellectual property. This cooperation may include:

(a) promoting communication between the Parties’ respective competent
authorities that have an interest in the field of intellectual property;

’ For greater certainty, paragraph 3 does not require a Party to make available on the government website the entire
dossier for the relevant registered or granted intellectual property right.

14-8

(b)

exchanging information on:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)
(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

each Party’s laws, regulations, procedures, and experiences in the
field of intellectual property;

the implementation of intellectual property systems aimed at
promoting the efficient registration of intellectual property rights;

best practices on the enforcement of intellectual property rights;

the implementation of multilateral intellectual property
agreements, such as those concluded or administered under the
auspices of WIPO;

policies, programs, or issues relating to:

(A) _ the generation, use, and protection of intellectual property
by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises;

(B) — public awareness of intellectual property rights, including
education and awareness programs aimed at groups that are
underrepresented in the intellectual property system;

(C) — the prevention of misuses of intellectual property rights,
such as minimum requirements for patent demand letters,
and evolving policy matters, such as the licensing and
enforcement of standard essential patents; or

(D) intermediaries, such as the provision of limitations and
exceptions regarding the liability of intermediary service
providers for infringements taking place on or through
communication networks, in relation to the provision or use
of their services;

the collection of data, including sex-disaggregated data and
diversity-focused statistics, for the purposes of evidence-based
decision-making; or

intellectual property issues relevant to:

(A) — research and science;

(B) the generation, transfer, and dissemination of technology;

(C) — the commercialisation of research and development,
innovation, and economic growth, including the valuation

of intellectual property; or

(D) — global issues such as climate change, public health, and
food security.

14-9

Article 14.15: Cooperation in the Area of Geographical Indications

The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate to facilitate the application process for
the authorities responsible for particular geographical indications of each Party, notably
by discussing and providing clarifications on:

(a) respective application procedures of the Parties;
(b) information they each require to be included in the applications; or

(c) how to protect a Party’s geographical indications for handicrafts and
industrial products under the other Party’s trademarks regime, if the other
Party does not protect handicrafts and industrial products as geographical
indications in its jurisdiction.

Article 14.16: Cooperation in the Area of Genetic Resources, Traditional
Knowledge, and Traditional Cultural Expressions

1. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate through their respective agencies
responsible for intellectual property, or other relevant institutions, with the participation
of holders of traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions, if appropriate, to
enhance the understanding of issues relating to intellectual property and:

(a) genetic resources;

(b) traditional knowledge, including traditional knowledge associated with
genetic resources; or

(c) traditional cultural expressions.

2. Further to Article 14.71 (Pursuit of Quality Patent Examination), the Parties may
cooperate in the training of patent examiners in the examination of patent applications
related to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources.

3. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate under the auspices of WIPO to promote
multilateral understanding and information sharing on issues relating to traditional
knowledge, including traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources, and
traditional cultural expressions.

Article 14.17: Cooperation in the Area of Enforcement of Intellectual Property
Rights

1. The Parties recognise the challenges related to the enforcement of intellectual
property rights, particularly in trans-border contexts. The Parties shall endeavour to
cooperate, as appropriate, to limit the economic and social costs of counterfeit trademark
goods, counterfeit geographical indication goods, and pirated copyright goods in
accordance with each Party’s law.

14-10

2. Each Party shall endeavour to encourage the development of expertise for the
enforcement of intellectual property rights. The Parties shall also endeavour to exchange
information and share best practices in areas of mutual interest relating to the
enforcement of intellectual property rights in accordance with each Party’s law.

3. The Parties’ respective competent authorities may cooperate, as appropriate, to
better identify and target the inspection of shipments suspected of containing counterfeit
trademark goods, counterfeit geographical indication goods, or pirated copyright goods.
In doing so, the Parties shall endeavour to share:

(a) information on innovative approaches that may be developed to provide
greater analytical targeting of shipments that could contain counterfeit
trademark goods, counterfeit geographical indication goods, or pirated
copyright goods; and

(b) information and intelligence regarding shipments of suspected counterfeit
trademark goods, counterfeit geographical indication goods, or pirated
copyright goods in appropriate cases.

Article 14.18: Patent Cooperation

1. The Parties recognise the importance of having a high quality and efficient patent
registration system as well as having simplified and streamlined procedures and
processes of their respective patent offices for the benefit of all users of the patent system
and the public as a whole.

2. The Parties shall endeavour to, if appropriate, cooperate among their respective
patent offices to facilitate the sharing of search and examination work, and exchanges of
information on quality assurance systems which may facilitate better understanding of the
Parties’ patent systems.®

3. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate to reduce differences in the procedures
and processes of their respective patent offices, with a view to reduce the complexity and
cost of obtaining the grant of a patent.

4. The Parties recognise the importance of giving due consideration to ratifying or

acceding to the Patent Law Treaty, or in the alternative, adopting or maintaining
procedural standards consistent with the objective of the Patent Law Treaty.

Article 14.19: Cooperation in the Area of Public Health

The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate to promote multilateral understanding
and information sharing on issues relating to intellectual property and public health.

8 This paragraph may apply to multilateral information sharing systems to support work-sharing initiatives.

14-11

Article 14.20: Cooperation on Request

Any cooperation activity undertaken pursuant to this Section must be on request.
These activities must also be subject to the availability of resources, and on terms and
conditions consented to by the Parties.

Section C: Trademarks

Article 14.21: Types of Signs Registrable as Trademarks

A Party shall not require, as a condition of registration, that a sign be visually
perceptible, and a Party shall not deny registration of a trademark only on the ground that
the sign of which it is composed is a sound or hologram. A Party may require a concise
and accurate description, or graphical representation, or both, as applicable, of the
trademark.

Article 14.22: Collective and Certification Marks

Each Party shall provide that trademarks include collective marks. Each Party
shall also protect certification marks. A Party is not obligated to treat certification marks
as a Separate category in its law, provided that those marks are protected. Each Party shall
also provide that signs that may serve as geographical indications are capable of
protection under its trademark system.”

Article 14.23: Use of Identical or Similar Signs

Each Party shall provide that the owner of a registered trademark has the
exclusive right to prevent third parties that do not have the owner’s consent from using in
the course of trade identical or similar signs for goods or services that are related to those
goods or services in respect of which the owner’s trademark is registered, if that use
would result in a likelihood of confusion. In the case of the use of an identical sign for
identical goods or services, a likelihood of confusion shall be presumed.

Article 14.24: Exceptions

A Party may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark,
such as fair use of descriptive terms, provided that those exceptions take account of the
legitimate interest of the owner of the trademark and of third parties.

° Consistent with the definition of a geographical indication in Article 14.1 (Definitions), any sign or combination of
signs shall be eligible for protection under one or more of the legal means for protecting geographical indications, or a
combination of those means.

14-12

Article 14.25: Well-Known Trademarks

1. A Party shall not require as a condition for determining that a trademark is
well-known that the trademark has been registered in the Party or in another jurisdiction,
included on a list of well-known trademarks, or given prior recognition as a well-known
trademark.

2. Article 6bis of the Paris Convention shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to goods or
services that are not identical or similar to those identified by a well-known trademark”®,
provided that use of that trademark in relation to those goods or services would indicate a
connection between those goods or services and the owner of the trademark, and
provided that the interests of the owner of the trademark are likely to be damaged by such
use.

3. Each Party recognises the importance of the Joint Recommendation Concerning
Provisions on the Protection of Well-Known Marks, as adopted by the Assembly of the
Paris Union for the Protection of Industrial Property and the General Assembly of WIPO
at the Thirty-Fourth Series of Meetings of the Assemblies of the Member States of WIPO
held from 20 to 29 September 1999.

4. Each Party shall provide for appropriate measures to refuse the application or
cancel the registration and prohibit the use of a trademark that is identical or similar to a
well-known trademark!', for identical or similar goods or services, if the use of that
trademark is likely to cause confusion with the prior well-known trademark. A Party may
also provide those measures including in cases in which the subsequent trademark is
likely to deceive.

Article 14.26: Bad Faith Trademark Applications

Each Party shall provide, in accordance with its law, that its competent authority
has the authority to refuse an application or cancel a registration if the application to
register the trademark was made in bad faith.

Article 14.27: Procedural Aspects of Examination, Opposition, and Cancellation

Each Party shall provide a system for the examination and registration of
trademarks that includes among other things:

(a) communicating to the applicant in writing, which may be by electronic
means, the reasons for any refusal to register a trademark;

(b) providing the applicant with an opportunity to respond to communications
from the competent authorities, to contest any initial refusal, and to make a
judicial appeal of any final refusal to register a trademark;

'0 In determining whether a trademark is well-known in a Party, that Party need not require that the reputation of the
trademark extend beyond the sector of the public that normally deals with the relevant goods or services.

'l The Parties understand that a well-known trademark is one that was already well-known before, as determined by a
Party, the application for, registration of, or use of the first-mentioned trademark.

14-13

(c) providing an opportunity to oppose the registration of a trademark or to
seek cancellation!’ of a trademark; and

(d) requiring decisions’? made by a competent authority in opposition and
cancellation proceedings to be reasoned and in writing, which may be
provided by electronic means.

Article 14.28: Electronic Trademarks System

1. Each Party shall provide a system for the electronic application for, and renewal
of, trademarks. Each Party shall ensure that this system provides applicants with the
ability to electronically:

(a) amend trademark applications;

(b) group goods or services according to the classification established by the
Nice Agreement;

(c) transfer ownership; and

(d) file, and respond to, trademark opposition proceedings, including the
ability to send general correspondence in relation to these proceedings.

2. Each Party shall provide a publicly available electronic information system,
including an online database, of trademark applications and of registered trademarks.

Article 14.29: Classification of Goods and Services

Each Party shall adopt or maintain a trademark classification system that is
consistent with the Nice Agreement. Each Party shall provide that:

(a) registrations and the publications of applications indicate the goods and
services by their names, grouped according to the classes established by
the Nice Agreement;'* and

(b) goods or services may not be considered as being similar to each other on
the ground that, in any registration or publication, they are classified in the
same class of the Nice Agreement. Conversely, each Party shall provide
that goods or services may not be considered as being dissimilar from each
other on the ground that, in any registration or publication, they are
classified in different classes of the Nice Agreement.

"2 For greater certainty, cancellation for the purposes of this Section may be implemented through nullification or
revocation proceedings.

'3 A Party may comply with this obligation by requiring decisions made by an administrative body in opposition and
cancellation proceedings to be reasoned and in writing.

'4 A Party that relies on translations of the Nice Agreement shall follow updated versions of the Nice Agreement to the
extent that official translations have been issued and published.

14-14

Article 14.30: Term of Protection for Trademarks

Each Party shall provide that initial registration and each renewal of registration
of a trademark is for a term of no less than 10 years.

Article 14.31: Recordal of a Licence

A Party shall not discourage or impede the voluntary licensing of a trademark by
imposing recordal conditions that:

(a) are excessive or discriminatory; or

(b) reduce the value of the trademark.

Article 14.32: Domain Names

1. In connection with each Party’s system for the management of its country-code
top-level domain (ccTLD) domain names, the following shall be available:

(a) an appropriate procedure for the settlement of disputes, based on, or
modelled along the same lines as, the principles established in the Uniform
Domain-Name Dispute-Resolution Policy, as approved by the Internet
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers or that:

(1) is designed to resolve disputes expeditiously and at low cost;
(11) — is fair and equitable;

(111) is not overly burdensome; and

(iv) does not preclude resort to judicial proceedings; and

(b) online public access to a reliable and accurate database of contact
information concerning domain name registrants,

in accordance with each Party’s law and, if applicable, relevant administrator
policies regarding protection of privacy and personal data.

2. In connection with each Party’s system for the management of ccTLD domain
names, appropriate remedies!> shall be available at least in cases in which a person
registers or holds, with a bad faith intent to profit, a domain name that is identical or
confusingly similar to a trademark.

Article 14.33: Country Names
Each Party shall provide the legal means for interested persons to prevent

commercial use of the country name of a Party in relation to a good in a manner that
misleads consumers as to the origin of that good.

'S The Parties understand that these remedies may include revocation, cancellation, transfer, damages, or injunctive
relief.

14-15

Section D: Geographical Indications

Article 14.34: Recognition of Geographical Indications

1. Each Party shall ensure in its laws and regulations adequate and effective means
to protect geographical indications.'® The Parties recognise that geographical indications
may be protected through a trademark or a sui generis system or other legal means.

2. Each Party shall ensure that the means to protect geographical indications referred
to in paragraph | are consistent with the TRIPS Agreement.

Article 14.35: Procedures for the Protection!’ of Geographical Indications

Each Party shall provide administrative or judicial procedures for the protection of
geographical indications, whether through a trademark or a sui generis system, and with
respect to applications for that protection, each Party shall:

(a) accept those applications without requiring intercession by the other Party
on behalf of its nationals;

(b) process those applications without imposing overly burdensome
formalities;

(c) ensure that its laws and regulations governing the filing of those
applications are readily available to the public and clearly set out the
procedures for these actions;

(d) make available information sufficient to allow the general public to obtain
guidance concerning the procedures for filing applications and the
processing of those applications in general;

(e) allow an applicant or their representative to ascertain the status of specific
applications;

(f) require that applications may specify particular translation for which
protection is being sought;

(g) examine applications;

(h) ensure that those applications are published for opposition and provide
procedures for opposing geographical indications that are the subject of
applications;

(1) provide a reasonable period of time during which an interested person may
oppose the application. That period shall allow for a meaningful
opportunity for any interested person to participate in an opposition
process;

'6 For greater certainty, a Party shall provide adequate and effective means to protect geographical indications to the
extent provided for by its law.

'7 For the purposes of this Section, the protection of a geographical indication includes the recognition of that
geographical indication.

14-16

(j) require that decisions in opposition and cancellation!* proceedings be
reasoned and in writing, which may be provided by electronic means; and

(k) provide for cancellation of the protection afforded to a geographical
indication.

Article 14.36: Grounds of Opposition and Cancellation’”

1. With respect to the procedures referred to in Article 14.35 (Procedures for the
Protection of Geographical Indications), each Party shall provide procedures that allow
interested persons to oppose the protection of a geographical indication, and that allow
for that protection to be refused or otherwise not afforded, at least, on the grounds that the
geographical indication is a term customary in common language as the common name”
for the relevant good in the territory of the Party.

2. Each Party shall provide procedures that allow for interested persons to seek the
cancellation of a geographical indication, and that allow for the protection to be
cancelled, at least, on the grounds referred to in paragraph 1.

3. A Party shall not preclude the possibility that the protection of a geographical
indication may be cancelled, or otherwise cease, on the basis that the protected term has
ceased meeting the conditions upon which the protection was originally granted in that
Party.

4. If a Party provides protection of a geographical indication through the procedures
referred to in Article 14.35 (Procedures for the Protection of Geographical Indications) to
the translation or transliteration of that geographical indication, that Party shall make
available procedures that are equivalent to, and grounds that are the same as, those
referred to in paragraphs | and 2 with respect to that translation or transliteration.

Article 14.37: Multi-Component Terms

With respect to the procedures in Article 14.35 (Procedures for the Protection of
Geographical Indications) and Article 14.36 (Grounds of Opposition and Cancellation),
an individual component of a multi-component term that is protected as a geographical
indication in the territory of a Party shall not be protected in that Party if that individual
component is a term customary in the common language as the common name for the
associated good.

'8 For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Section, cancellation may be implemented through nullification or
revocation proceedings.

'9 A Party is not required to apply this Article to geographical indications for wines and spirits or to applications for
those geographical indications.

20 For greater certainty, if a Party chooses to apply this Article to geographical indications for wines and spirits or
applications for those geographical indications, that Party is not required to protect a geographical indication of the
other Party with respect to products of the vine for which the relevant indication is identical with the customary name
of a grape variety existing in the territory of that Party.

14-17

Article 14.38: Date of Protection of a Geographical Indication

The protection of a geographical indication through the procedures referred to in
Article 14.35 (Procedures for the Protection of Geographical Indications) shall
commence no earlier than the filing date”! in the Party or the registration date in the
Party, as applicable.

Article 14.39: International Agreements

1. If a Party commits to protect a geographical indication pursuant to an
international agreement, as of the applicable date under paragraph 6, involving a Party or
a non-Party, that Party shall, prior to protecting that geographical indication, apply the
procedures in Article 14.35 (Procedures for the Protection of Geographical Indications)”
and Article 14.36 (Grounds of Opposition and Cancellation), as well as:

(a) with respect to multi-component terms, specifying the components, if any,
for which protection is being considered, or the components that are
disclaimed; and

(b) inform the other Party of the opportunity to oppose, no later than the
commencement of the opposition period.”

2. In respect of international agreements referred to in paragraph 6 that permit the
protection of a new geographical indication, a Party shall, prior to protecting or
recognising that geographical indication, apply the procedures in Article 14.35
(Procedures for the Protection of Geographical Indications) and Article 14.36 (Grounds
of Opposition and Cancellation), as well as inform the other Party of the opportunity to
oppose, no later than the commencement of the opposition period.”

3. For the purposes of this Article, a Party shall not preclude the possibility that the
protection of a geographical indication could cease.”>

4. For the purposes of this Article, a Party is not required to apply Article 14.36
(Grounds of Opposition and Cancellation), or obligations equivalent to Article 14.36, to
geographical indications for wines and spirits or applications for those geographical
indications.

5. The protection that each Party provides pursuant to paragraph | shall commence
no earlier than the date on which that agreement enters into force or, if that Party grants
that protection on a date after the entry into force of that agreement, on that later date.

>! For greater certainty, the filing date referred to in this paragraph includes, as applicable, the priority filing date under
the Paris Convention.

>? For greater certainty, an administrative or judicial body shall decide on the protection of that geographical indication.

>3 For greater certainty, a Party can fulfil this obligation by complying with the obligations under subparagraphs (h)
and (i) of Article 14.35 (Procedures for the Protection of Geographical Indications).

*4 For greater certainty, a Party can fulfil this obligation by complying with the obligations under subparagraphs (h)
and (i) of Article 14.35 (Procedures for the Protection of Geographical Indications).

°5 A Party is not required to apply this provision to geographical indications for wines and spirits or to applications for
those geographical indications.

14-18

6. A Party shall not be required to apply this Article to geographical indications that
have been specifically identified in, and that are protected pursuant to an international
agreement involving the other Party or a non-Party, provided that the agreement was
concluded prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 14.40: Protection of Geographical Indications

The Parties recognise that each Party may have terms for wines, spirits,
agricultural products, foods, handicrafts, or industrial products that originate and are
protected as geographical indications in their respective territories. In order to seek
intellectual property protection in the other Party’s territory, the authorities of a Party
responsible for the particular terms shall apply for protection in the territory of the other
Party in accordance with the procedures and requirements prescribed by the law of that
Party.

Section E: Patents

Article 14.41: Patentable Subject Matter

1. Subject to paragraph 3, each Party shall make patents available for any invention,
whether a product or process, in all fields of technology, provided that the invention is
new, involves an inventive step, and is capable of industrial application.”°

2. Subject to paragraph 3 and consistent with paragraph 1, each Party shall make
patents available for inventions claimed as at least one of the following: new uses of a
known product, new methods of using a known product, or new processes of using a
known product. A Party may limit those new processes to those that do not claim the use
of the product as such.

3. A Party may exclude from patentability inventions, the prevention within its
territory of the commercial exploitation of which is necessary to protect ordre public or
morality, including to protect human, animal, or plant life or health or to avoid serious
prejudice to nature or the environment, provided that such exclusion is not made merely
because the exploitation is prohibited by its law. A Party may also exclude from
patentability:

(a) diagnostic, therapeutic, and surgical methods for the treatment of humans
or animals; or

(b) plants and animals other than microorganisms, and essentially biological
processes for the production of plants or animals, other than nonbiological
and microbiological processes.’

°6 For the purposes of this Section, a Party may deem the terms “inventive step” and “capable of industrial application”
to be synonymous with the terms “‘non-obvious” and “useful”, respectively. In determinations regarding inventive step,
or non-obviousness, each Party shall consider whether the claimed invention would have been obvious to a person
skilled, or having ordinary skill in the art, having regard to the prior art.

°7 Consistent with paragraph 1, each Party confirms that patents are available at least for inventions that are derived
from plants.

14-19

Article 14.42: Rights Conferred

1. Each Party shall provide that a patent shall confer on its owner the following
exclusive rights:

(a) where the subject matter of a patent is a product, to prevent third parties
not having the owner’s consent from the acts of making, using, offering
for sale, selling, or importing for these purposes that product; and

(b) where the subject matter of a patent is a process, to prevent third parties
not having the owner’s consent from the act of using the process, and from
the acts of using, offering for sale, selling, or importing for these purposes
at least the product obtained directly by that process.

2. Patent owners shall also have the right to assign, or transfer by succession, the
patent and to conclude licensing contracts.

Article 14.43: Non-Prejudicial Disclosures

Each Party shall disregard at least information contained in public disclosures
used to determine if an invention is novel or has an inventive step, if the public

disclosure:7® 7?

(a) was made by the patent applicant or by a person that obtained the
information directly or indirectly from the patent applicant; and

(b) occurred within 12 months prior to the date of the filing of the application
in the territory of the Party.

Article 14.44: Patent Revocation

1. Each Party shall provide that a patent may be cancelled*’, revoked, or nullified
only on grounds that would have justified a refusal to grant the patent. A Party may also
provide that fraud, misrepresentation, or inequitable conduct may be the basis for
cancelling, revoking or nullifying a patent or holding a patent unenforceable.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a Party may provide that a patent may be revoked,
provided it is done in a manner consistent with Article 5A of the Paris Convention and
the TRIPS Agreement.

28 A Party shall not be required to disregard information contained in applications for, or registrations of, intellectual
property rights made available to the public or published by a patent office, unless erroneously published or unless the
application was filed without the consent of the inventor or their successor in title, by a third person who obtained the
information directly or indirectly from the inventor.

°° For greater certainty, a Party may limit the application of this Article to disclosures made by, or obtained directly or
indirectly from, the inventor or joint inventor. For greater certainty, a Party may provide that, for the purposes of this
Article, information obtained directly or indirectly from the patent applicant may be information contained in the public
disclosure that was authorised by, or derived from, the patent applicant.

30 The Parties affirm Article.14.4 (Nature and Scope of Obligations), which provides each Party the freedom to
determine the appropriate method of implementing the provisions of this Chapter within its own legal system and
practice, and the Parties understand that a Party can choose to implement this paragraph through invalidation
proceedings, as appropriate.

14-20

Article 14.45: Recordal of a Licence

A Party shall not discourage or impede the voluntary licensing of a patent by
imposing recordal conditions that:

(a) are excessive or discriminatory; or

(b) reduce the value of the patent.

Article 14.46: Exceptions

A Party may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a
patent, provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with a normal
exploitation of the patent and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the
patent owner, taking account of the legitimate interests of third parties.

Article 14.47: Other Use Without Authorisation of the Right Holder

The Parties understand that nothing in this Chapter limits a Party’s rights and
obligations under Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement, and any waiver or any amendment
to that Article that the Parties accept.*!

Article 14.48: Patent Filing

Each Party shall provide that if an invention is made independently by more than
one inventor, and separate applications claiming that invention are filed with, or for, the
relevant authority of the Party, that Party shall grant the patent on the application that is
patentable and that has the earliest filing date or, if applicable, priority date, unless that
application has, prior to publication, been withdrawn, abandoned, or refused.

Article 14.49: Amendments, Corrections, and Observations

Each Party shall provide a patent applicant with at least one opportunity to make
amendments, corrections, and observations in connection with its application.*”

Article 14.50: Publication of Patent Applications

1. Recognising the benefits of transparency in the patent system, each Party shall
endeavour to publish pending applications promptly after the expiration of 18 months
from the filing date or, if priority is claimed, from the earliest priority date.

2. If a pending application is not published promptly in accordance with
paragraph 1, a Party shall publish that application or the corresponding patent, as soon as
practicable.

3! For greater certainty, a waiver of or amendment to Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement includes Article 31 bis of the
TRIPS Agreement.

32 A Party may provide that those amendments do not go beyond the scope of the disclosure of the invention, as of the
filing date.

14-21

3. Each Party shall provide that an applicant may request the early publication of an
application prior to the expiration of the period referred to in paragraph 1.

Article 14.51: Information Relating to Published Patent Applications and Granted
Patents

1. For granted patents, and in accordance with the Party’s requirements for
prosecution of those patents, each Party shall make available to the public at least the
following information, to the extent that such information is in the possession of the
competent authorities and is generated on, or after, the date of the entry into force of this
Agreement:

(a) search and examination results, including details of, or information related
to, relevant prior art searches; and

(b) patent and non-patent related literature citations submitted by applicants
and relevant third parties.

2. For granted patents, and in accordance with the Party’s requirements for
prosecution of those patents, each Party shall endeavour to make available to the public,
as appropriate, non-confidential communications from patent applicants, to the extent that
such information is in the possession of the competent authorities and is generated on, or
after, the date of the entry into force of this Agreement.

3. For published patent applications, and in accordance with the Party’s
requirements for prosecution of those applications, each Party shall endeavour to make
available to the public at least the following information, to the extent that such
information is in the possession of the competent authorities and is generated on, or after,
the date of the entry into force of this Agreement:

(a) search and examination results, including details of, or information related
to, relevant prior art searches;

(b) as appropriate, non-confidential communications from applicants; and

(c) patent and non-patent related literature citations submitted by applicants
and relevant third parties.

Article 14.52: Regulatory Review Exception

Without prejudice to the scope of, and consistent with, Article 14.46.
(Exceptions), each Party shall adopt or maintain a regulatory review exception.**

33 For greater certainty, consistent with Article 14.46 (Exceptions), nothing prevents a Party from providing that
regulatory review exceptions apply for purposes of regulatory reviews in that Party, in another country, or both.

14-22

Article 14.53: Protection of Undisclosed Test or Other Data for Pharmaceutical
Products

If a Party requires, as a condition of approving the marketing of a pharmaceutical
product that utilises a new chemical entity, the submission of undisclosed test or other
data, the origination of which involves a considerable effort, the Party shall protect that
data against unfair commercial use. The Party shall also protect that data against
disclosure except if the disclosure is necessary to protect the public or unless steps are
taken to ensure that the data are protected against unfair commercial use.

Article 14.54: Protection of Undisclosed Test or Other Data for New Agricultural
Chemical Products

1. If a Party requires, as a condition for granting marketing approval* for a new
agricultural chemical product, the submission of undisclosed test or other data concerning
the safety and efficacy of the product*>, that Party shall not permit third persons, without
the consent of the person that previously submitted that information, to market the same
or a similar*® product on the basis of that information or the marketing approval granted
to the person that submitted that test or other data for at least 10 years*’ from the date of
marketing approval of the new agricultural chemical product in the territory of the Party.

2. If a Party permits, as a condition of granting marketing approval for a new
agricultural chemical product, the submission of evidence of a prior marketing approval
of the product in another territory, that Party shall not permit third persons, without the
consent of the person that previously submitted undisclosed test or other data concerning
the safety and efficacy of the product in support of that prior marketing approval, to
market the same or a similar product based on that undisclosed test or other data, or other
evidence of the prior marketing approval in the other territory, for at least 10 years from
the date of marketing approval of the new agricultural chemical product in the territory of
the Party.

3. For the purposes of this Article, a new agricultural chemical product is one that
contains** a chemical entity that has not been previously approved in the territory of the
Party for use in an agricultural chemical product.

34 For the purposes of this Article, the term “marketing approval” is synonymous with “sanitary approval” under a
Party’s law.

35 Each Party confirms that the obligations of this Article apply to cases in which the Party requires the submission of
undisclosed test or other data concerning: (a) only the safety of the product; (b) only the efficacy of the product; or (c)
both.

36 For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Article, an agricultural chemical product is “similar” to a previously
approved agricultural chemical product if the marketing approval, or, in the alternative, the applicant’s request for that
approval, of that similar agricultural chemical product is based upon the undisclosed test or other data concerning the
safety and efficacy of the previously approved agricultural chemical product, or the prior approval of that previously
approved product.

37 For greater certainty, a Party may limit the period of protection under this Article to 10 years.

38 For the purpose of this Article, a Party may treat “contain” to mean utilise. For greater certainty, for the purposes of
this Article, a Party may treat “utilise” as requiring the new chemical entity to be primarily responsible for the
product’s intended effect.

14-23

Section F: Industrial Designs

Article 14.55: Protection

1. Each Party shall ensure adequate and effective protection of industrial designs
consistent with Articles 25 and 26 of the TRIPS Agreement.

2. Each Party shall make protection for industrial designs available for designs:
(a) embodied in a part of an article;~’ or, alternatively,

(b) having a particular regard, where appropriate, to a part of an article in the
context of the article as a whole.

3. Each Party shall make protection for industrial designs available for designs
applied to a set of articles.

Article 14.56: Improving Design Systems
The Parties recognise the importance of improving the quality and efficiency of

their respective industrial design registration systems, as well as facilitating the process
of cross-border acquisition of rights in their respective industrial design systems.

Article 14.57: Electronic Industrial Design System
1. Each Party shall provide a:
(a) system for the electronic application for industrial design rights; and

(b) publicly available electronic information system, which shall include an
online database of protected industrial designs.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to participate in the WIPO Digital Access Service for

the secure exchange of priority and similar documentation in connection with industrial
design applications.

Article 14.58: Term of Protection

1. Each Party shall provide a term of protection for industrial designs of at least 10,
or alternatively 15*°, years from either:

(a) the date of filing; or

39 For greater certainty, a Party’s law may designate a design embodied in a part of an article as a “partial design”.

40 For greater certainty, if a Party provides a term of more than 10 years, that Party shall not decrease the term to less
than 15 years.

14-24

(b) the date of grant or registration.

2. If a Party at any time provides a term of protection of 15 years, or longer, that
Party shall not decrease the term to less than 15 years.

Article 14.59: Recordal of a Licence

A Party shall not discourage or impede the voluntary licensing of an industrial
design by imposing recordal conditions that:

(a) are excessive or discriminatory; or

(b) reduce the value of the industrial design.

Article 14.60: Non-Prejudicial Disclosures

If a Party disregards information contained in public disclosures used to
determine if an industrial design is new or original, that Party shall disregard this public
disclosure if it occurred within six, or alternatively 12*', months prior to the filing date in

the territory of the Party. If a Party at any time provides a period of 12 months, that Party
shall not decrease the period to less than 12 months.

Article 14.61: Graphical User Interface

Each Party shall provide industrial design protection in relation to a new or
original design for a graphical user interface design.

Section G: Copyright and Related Rights

Article 14.62: Protection Granted

1. Each Party shall comply with the following international agreements:
(a) Articles 2 through 20 of the Berne Convention;
(b) Articles | through 14 of the WCT; and
(c) Articles | through 23 of the WPPT.

2. Each Party shall provide protections consistent with Articles 1 through 22 of the
Rome Convention.”

41 For greater certainty, if a Party provides a period of more than six months, that Party shall provide a period of at least
12 months. If a Party provides that period of 12 months, or longer, that Party shall not decrease the period to less than
12 months.

# For greater certainty, this paragraph does not create an obligation to accede to or ratify the Rome Convention.

14-25

3. To the extent permitted by the treaties referred to in paragraph | and paragraph 2,
this Chapter shall not restrict each Party’s ability to limit intellectual property protection
that it accords to performances to those performances that are fixed in phonograms.

Article 14.63: Term of Protection for Copyright and Related Rights

1. In cases in which the term of protection of a work, performance, or phonogram is
to be calculated on the basis of the life of a natural person, each Party shall provide that
the term shall be not less than the life of the author and 70 years after the author’s
death.

2. In cases in which the term of protection of a work, performance, or phonogram is
to be calculated on a basis other than the life of a natural person, each Party:

(a) confirms that it shall provide the term of protection required under
Article 14.62 (Protection Granted); and

(b) shall provide a term of protection consistent with the TRIPS Agreement.

Article 14.64: Protection of Technological Measures

1. For the purposes of this Article, a “technological measure” means a technology,
device, or component that, in the normal course of its operation, is designed to prevent or
restrict acts, in respect of works, performances, or phonograms, that are not authorised by
authors, performers, or producers of phonograms, as provided for by the law of a Party.
Without prejudice to the scope of copyright or related rights contained in the law of a
Party, technological measures shall be deemed effective where the use of protected
works, performances, or phonograms is controlled by authors, performers, or producers
of phonograms through the application of a relevant access control or protection process,
such as encryption or scrambling, or a copy control mechanism, that achieves the
objective of protection.

2. Each Party shall provide adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies
against the circumvention of effective technological measures that are used by authors,
performers, or producers of phonograms in connection with the exercise of their rights in,
and that restrict acts in respect of, their works, performances, and phonograms, which are
not authorised by the authors, the performers, or the producers of phonograms concerned
or permitted by its law.

43 The Parties understand that if a Party provides its nationals a term of copyright protection that exceeds life of the
author plus 70 years, nothing in this Article or Article 14.10 (National Treatment) precludes that Party from applying
Article 7(8) of the Berne Convention with respect to the term in excess of the term provided in this subparagraph of
protection for works of the other Party.

14-26

3. In order to provide the adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies
referred to in paragraph 2, each Party shall at least:

(a) to the extent provided by its law, provide protection against:

(1) the unauthorised circumvention of an effective technological
measure carried out knowingly or with reasonable grounds to
know; and

(11) the offering to the public by marketing of a device or product,
including computer programs, or a service, as a means of
circumventing an effective technological measure; and

(b) provide protection in its law against the manufacture, importation, or
distribution of a device or product, including computer programs, or
provision of a service that:

(1) is primarily designed or produced for the purpose of circumventing
an effective technological measure; or

(11) has only a limited commercially significant purpose other than
circumventing an effective technological measure.

4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, the term “to the extent provided by its law”
means that each Party has flexibility in implementing sub-subparagraphs (a)(i) and (ii).

5. In implementing paragraphs 2 and 3, a Party shall not be obliged to require that
the design of, or design and selection of parts and components for, a consumer
electronics, telecommunications, or computing product provide for a response to any
particular technological measure, so long as the product does not otherwise contravene
that Party’s measures implementing these paragraphs.**

6. In providing adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies pursuant to
paragraph 2, a Party may adopt or maintain appropriate limitations or exceptions to
measures implementing the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3. The obligations set forth in
paragraphs 2 and 3 are without prejudice to the rights, limitations, exceptions, or defences
to copyright or related rights infringement under the law of a Party.

Article 14.65: Protection of Rights Management Information
1. For the purposes of this Article, “rights management information” means:

(a) information that identifies the work, the performance, or the phonogram;
the author of the work, the performer of the performance, or the producer
of the phonogram; or the owner of any right in the work, performance, or
phonogram;

(b) information about the terms and conditions of use of the work,
performance, or phonogram; or

44 The Parties understand that this Agreement does not require a Party to mandate interoperability in its law; there is no
obligation for the information communication technology industry to design devices, products, components, or services
to correspond to certain technological measures.

14-27

(c) any numbers or codes that represent the information described in (a)
and (b) above,

when any of these items of information is attached to a copy of a work,
performance, or phonogram, or appears in connection with the communication or
making available of a work, performance, or phonogram to the public.*°

2. To protect electronic rights management information, each Party shall provide
adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies against any person knowingly
performing, without authority, any of the following acts knowing, or having reasonable
grounds to know, that it will induce, enable, facilitate, or conceal an infringement of any
copyright or related rights:

(a) to remove or alter any electronic rights management information; or

(b) to distribute, import for distribution, broadcast, communicate, or make
available to the public copies of works, performances, or phonograms,
knowing that electronic rights management information has been removed
or altered without authority.

3. In providing adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies pursuant to
paragraph 2, a Party may adopt or maintain appropriate limitations or exceptions to
measures implementing paragraph 2. The obligations set forth in paragraph 2 are without
prejudice to the rights, limitations, exceptions, or defences to copyright or related rights
infringement under the law of a Party.

Article 14.66: Recordal of a Licence

A Party shall not discourage or impede the voluntary licensing of a copyright or
related right by imposing recordal conditions that:

(a) are excessive or discriminatory; or

(b) reduce the value of the copyright or the related right.

Article 14.67: Government Use of Software

Each Party shall adopt or maintain appropriate laws, regulations, policies, orders,
government-issued guidelines, or administrative or executive decrees that provide that its
government agencies use only non-infringing computer software protected by copyright
and related rights, and, if applicable, only use that computer software in a manner
authorised by the relevant licence. These measures shall apply to the acquisition and
management of the software for government use.

45 In addition to paragraph 1, a Party may also treat information that confirms the authenticity of a work, performance,
or phonogram as rights management information, if this item of information: (a) is attached to a copy of a work,
performance, or phonogram; or (b) appears in connection with the communication or making available of a work,
performance, or phonogram to the public.

14-28

Section H: Trade Secrets

Article 14.68: Protection of Trade Secrets

In fulfilling its obligations under paragraphs | and 2 of Article 39 of the TRIPS
Agreement, each Party shall:

(a) ensure that persons have the legal means to prevent trade secrets lawfully
in their control from being disclosed to, acquired by, or used by any other
person*° without their consent in a manner contrary to honest commercial
practices; and

(b) not limit the duration of protection for a trade secret, so long as the
conditions in the definition of trade secret in Article 14.1 (Definitions)
exist.

Article 14.69: Licensing and Transfer of Trade Secrets

A Party shall not discourage or impede the voluntary licensing of a trade secret by
imposing conditions that are excessive or discriminatory, or that reduce the value of the
trade secret.

Section I: Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge, and Traditional
Cultural Expressions

Article 14.70: Protection of Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge, and
Traditional Cultural Expressions

1. The Parties affirm the importance and value of genetic resources, traditional
knowledge, including traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources, and
traditional cultural expressions.

2. Subject to its international obligations, each Party may establish appropriate
measures“’ to protect genetic resources, traditional knowledge, and traditional cultural
expressions.

3. The Parties recognise that disclosure related to genetic resources and traditional
knowledge associated with genetic resources in respect of patent applications can
enhance the efficacy, transparency, and quality of the patent system, and can also prevent
patents from being granted erroneously for inventions that are not novel or inventive with
regard to genetic resources and traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources.*®

4 For greater certainty, the Parties understand that a “person”, as defined in Article 1.5 (Initial Provisions and General
Definitions — General Definitions), includes a state-owned enterprise.

47 For greater certainty, the Parties understand that these “appropriate measures” are a matter for each Party to
determine and may not necessarily involve its intellectual property system.

48 For greater certainty, the Parties further recognise that such disclosure may be facilitated in different ways, including
processes for the submission of relevant prior art.

14-29

4. The Parties recognise that a Party may adopt or maintain disclosure requirements
relating to the origin of genetic resources or traditional knowledge associated with
genetic resources, and that those requirements must be consistent with the Party’s
international obligations.

5. Each Party shall make available its laws, regulations, or procedures with respect
to disclosure referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 on a government website, in a manner that
enables interested persons and the other Party to become acquainted with them.

Article 14.71: Pursuit of Quality Patent Examination
Each Party shall endeavour to, in its patent-examination process:

(a) take into account relevant publicly available documented information
related to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources in
determining prior art;

(b) provide an opportunity for third parties to cite, in writing, to the competent
examining authority prior art disclosures that may have a bearing on
patentability, including prior art disclosures related to traditional
knowledge associated with genetic resources; and

(c) use publicly available databases or digital libraries containing traditional
knowledge associated with genetic resources, if applicable and
appropriate.

Article 14.72: Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights Related to Genetic
Resources, Traditional Knowledge, and Traditional Cultural Expressions

Each Party confirms the availability of the remedies and penalties provided under
Section J (Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights), in respect of genetic resources,
traditional knowledge, and traditional cultural expressions, if applicable, and provided
that the subject matter is protected by that Party as intellectual property as defined in
Article 14.1 (Definitions).

Article 14.73: Engagement in Other Fora

The Parties acknowledge each other’s perspective on genetic resources, traditional
knowledge, and traditional cultural expressions. The Parties value continued engagement
in bilateral, plurilateral, and multilateral forums, including the WIPO Intergovernmental
Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge, and
Folklore, to foster mutual understanding, and to support balanced and effective protection
of genetic resources, traditional knowledge, and traditional cultural expressions.

14-30

Section J: Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights

Article 14.74: General Obligations

1. Each Party shall ensure that enforcement procedures are available under its law so
as to permit effective action against any act of infringement of intellectual property
rights’? covered by this Chapter, including expeditious remedies to prevent infringements
and remedies which constitute a deterrent to further infringements. These procedures
shall be applied in such a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade
and to provide for safeguards against their abuse.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its procedures concerning the enforcement of
intellectual property rights are fair and equitable. Each Party shall ensure that these
procedures are not unnecessarily complicated or costly, or entail unreasonable time limits
or unwarranted delays.

3. In implementing this Section, each Party shall take into account the need for
proportionality between the seriousness of the infringement of the intellectual property
right and the applicable measures, remedies, and penalties, as well as, if applicable, the
interests of third parties.

4. This Section does not create any obligation:

(a) to put in place a judicial system for the enforcement of intellectual
property rights distinct from that for the enforcement of law in general,
nor does it affect the capacity for each Party to enforce its law in
general; or

(b) with respect to the distribution of resources as between the enforcement of
intellectual property rights and the enforcement of law in general.

5. Each Party confirms that the enforcement procedures set forth in Subsection J-1
(Civil and Administrative Procedures and Remedies) and Subsection J-2 (Criminal
Procedures and Penalties) shall be available to the same extent with respect to acts of
trademark infringement, as well as copyright or related rights infringement, in the digital
environment.

6. Each Party recognises the importance of promoting the adoption of measures to
enhance government awareness of respect for intellectual property rights and of the
detrimental effects of the infringement of intellectual property rights.

4° For the purposes of this Article, the infringement of intellectual property rights includes the misappropriation of a
trade secret.

14-31

Article 14.75: Presumptions

1. In civil, criminal, and if applicable administrative proceedings, involving
copyright or related rights, each Party shall provide for a presumption” that, in the
absence of proof to the contrary:

(a) the person whose name is indicated in the usual manner! as the author,
performer, or producer of the work, performance, or phonogram, or if
applicable the publisher, is the designated right holder in that work,
performance, or phonogram; and

(b) the copyright or related right subsists in that subject matter.

2. In connection with the commencement of a civil, administrative, or criminal
enforcement proceeding involving a registered trademark that has been substantively
examined by its competent authority, each Party shall provide that the trademark be
considered prima facie valid.

3. In connection with the commencement of a civil or administrative enforcement
proceeding involving a patent that has been substantively examined and granted*” by the
competent authority of a Party, that Party shall provide that each claim in the patent be
considered prima facie to satisfy the applicable criteria of patentability in its territory.>°

Article 14.76: Enforcement Practices with Respect to Intellectual Property Rights

1. Each Party shall provide that final judicial decisions and administrative rulings of
general application pertaining to the enforcement of intellectual property rights:

(a) are preferably in writing and state any relevant findings of fact and the
reasoning or the legal basis on which the decisions and rulings are based;
and

(b) are published™ or, if publication is not practicable, otherwise made
available to the public in a national language in such a manner as to enable
interested persons and the other Party to become acquainted with them.

%° For greater certainty, a Party may implement this Article on the basis of sworn statements or documents having
evidentiary value, such as statutory declarations. A Party may also provide that these presumptions are rebuttable
presumptions that may be rebutted by evidence to the contrary.

>! For greater certainty, a Party may establish the means by which it shall determine what constitutes the “usual
manner” for a particular physical support.

>? For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter prevents a Party from making available third-party procedures in
connection with its fulfilment of the obligations under paragraphs 2 and 3.

*3 For greater certainty, if a Party provides its administrative authorities with the exclusive authority to determine the
validity of a registered trademark or patent, nothing in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall prevent that Party’s competent
authority from suspending enforcement procedures until the validity of the registered trademark or patent is determined
by the administrative authority. In those validity procedures, the party challenging the validity of the registered
trademark or patent shall be required to prove that the registered trademark or patent is not valid. Notwithstanding this
requirement, a Party may require the trademark holder to provide evidence of first use.

*4 For greater certainty, a Party may satisfy the requirement for publication by making the decision or ruling available
to the public on the Internet.

14-32

2. Each Party recognises the importance of collecting and analysing statistical data
and other relevant information concerning infringements of intellectual property rights as
well as collecting information on best practices to prevent and combat infringements and
misappropriations of trade secrets.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to publish or otherwise make available to the public
information on its efforts to enforce intellectual property rights in its civil, administrative,
and criminal systems.

Sub-Section J-1: Civil and Administrative Procedures and Remedies

Article 14.77: Available Procedures

Each Party shall make available to right holders civil judicial procedures
concerning the enforcement of any intellectual property right covered in this Chapter.>°

Article 14.78: Injunctions

Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to order
injunctive relief that conforms to Article 44 of the TRIPS Agreement, including to
prevent goods that involve the infringement of an intellectual property right under the law
of the Party providing that relief from entering into the channels of commerce.

Article 14.79: Damages

1. Each Party shall provide” that, in civil judicial proceedings, its judicial
authorities have the authority at least to order the infringer to pay the right holder
damages adequate to compensate for the injury the right holder has suffered because of
an infringement of that person’s intellectual property right by an infringer who
knowingly, or with reasonable grounds to know, engaged in infringing activity.

2. In determining the amount of damages under paragraph 1, each Party shall
provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to consider any legitimate measure
of value the right holder submits, which may include lost profits, the value of the
infringed goods or services measured by the market price, or the suggested retail price.

3. At least in cases of copyright or related rights infringement and trademark
counterfeiting, each Party shall provide that, in civil judicial proceedings, its judicial
authorities have the authority to order the infringer, at least in cases described in
paragraph 1, to pay the right holder the infringer’s profits that are attributable to the
infringement.

>> For the purposes of this Sub-Section, “right holders” include any person that has the legal standing and authority to
assert such rights.

%° A Party may provide that the right holder is not entitled to any of the remedies set out in paragraphs | and 3 if there
is a finding of non-use of a trademark. For greater certainty, there is no obligation for a Party to provide for the
possibility of any of the remedies in paragraphs | and 3 to be ordered in parallel.

14-33

Article 14.80: Legal Costs

Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities, if appropriate, have the
authority to order’, at the conclusion of civil judicial proceedings concerning the
infringement of at least copyright or related rights, trademarks, and patents that the
prevailing party is awarded payment by the losing party of court costs or fees and
appropriate attorney’s fees, or any other expenses as provided for under that Party’s law.

Article 14.81: Civil Enforcement and Remedies for Trade Secrets

1. In fulfilling its obligations under paragraphs | and 2 of Article 39 of the TRIPS
Agreement, each Party shall provide civil judicial procedures for any person lawfully in
control of a trade secret to prevent, and obtain redress for, the misappropriation of the
trade secret by any other person.

2. In connection with the civil judicial proceedings described in paragraph 1, each
Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority at least to order:

(a) injunctive relief that conforms to Article 44 of the TRIPS Agreement
against a person that misappropriated a trade secret;

(b) a person that misappropriated a trade secret to pay damages adequate to
compensate the person lawfully in control of the trade secret for the injury
suffered because of the misappropriation of the trade secret?® and, if
appropriate, because of the proceedings to enforce the trade secret; and

(c) at the conclusion of the civil judicial proceedings described in
paragraph 1, that the prevailing party be awarded payment by the losing
party of court costs or fees, appropriate attorney’s fees, or other expenses
as provided for under that Party’s law.

Article 14.82: Destruction of Infringing Goods, Materials, and Implements
Each Party shall provide that in civil judicial proceedings:

(a) at least with respect to pirated copyright goods, counterfeit geographical
indication goods, and counterfeit trademark goods, its judicial authorities
have the authority, at the right holder’s request, to order that the infringing
goods be destroyed, except in exceptional circumstances, without
compensation of any sort;

>” The Parties understand that a Party may further provide the prevailing party with the opportunity to request that order
subsequent to the conclusion of the civil judicial proceedings concerning infringement if the prevailing party failed to
request that order in those proceedings.

°8 For greater certainty, a Party may provide that the determination of damages is carried out after the determination of
misappropriation.

14-34

(b) its judicial authorities have the authority to order that materials and
implements that have been used in the manufacture or creation of the
infringing goods be, without undue delay and without compensation of
any sort, destroyed or disposed of outside the channels of commerce in
such a manner as to minimise the risk of further infringement; and

(c) in regard to counterfeit trademark goods, the simple removal of the
trademark unlawfully affixed is not sufficient, other than in exceptional
circumstances, to permit the release of goods into the channels of
commerce.

Article 14.83: Evidence and Right of Information

1. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority, if a party
has presented reasonably available evidence sufficient to support its claims and has
specified evidence relevant to substantiation of its claims which lies in the control of the
opposing party, to order that this evidence be produced by the opposing party, subject in
appropriate cases to conditions which ensure the protection of confidential information.

2. In cases in which a party to a proceeding voluntarily and without good reason
refuses access to, or otherwise does not provide necessary information within a
reasonable period, or significantly impedes a procedure relating to an enforcement action,
a Party may accord judicial authorities the authority to make preliminary and final
determinations, affirmative or negative, on the basis of the information presented to them,
including the complaint or the allegation presented by the party adversely affected by the
denial of access to information, subject to providing the parties an opportunity to be
heard on the allegations or evidence.

3. A Party may provide its judicial authorities with the authority, unless this would
be out of proportion to the seriousness of the infringement, to order the infringer to
inform the right holder of the identity of third persons involved in the production and
distribution of the infringing goods or services and of their channels of distribution.

Article 14.84: Confidentiality Measures

1. In civil judicial procedures referred to in Article 14.77 (Available Procedures),
each Party shall provide a means to identify and protect confidential information, unless
this would be contrary to the Party’s existing constitutional requirements.

2. Each Party shall provide that in civil judicial proceedings concerning the
enforcement of intellectual property rights, its judicial or other authorities have the
authority to impose sanctions on the parties to the proceeding, their counsel, experts, or
other persons subject to the court’s jurisdiction, for violation of judicial orders regarding
the protection of confidential information produced or exchanged in that proceeding.

14-35

Article 14.85: Abuse of Enforcement Procedures

Each Party shall ensure that its judicial authorities have the authority to order a
party at whose request measures were taken and that has abused enforcement procedures
with regard to intellectual property rights to provide to a party wrongfully enjoined or
restrained adequate compensation for the injury suffered because of that abuse. The
judicial authorities shall also have the authority to order the applicant to pay the
defendant expenses, which may include appropriate attorney’s fees.

Article 14.86: Technological Protection Measures and Rights Management
Information

In civil judicial proceedings concerning the acts described in Article 14.64
(Protection of Technological Measures) and Article 14.65 (Protection of Rights
Management Information):

(a) each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority at

least to:>?

(1) impose provisional measures, including seizure or other taking into
custody of devices and products suspected of being involved in the
prohibited activity;

(11) order the type of damages available for copyright infringement, as
provided under its law in accordance with this Article;®

(i111) | order court costs, fees, or expenses as provided for under
Article 14.80 (Legal Costs); and

(iv) — order the destruction of devices and products found to be involved
in the prohibited activity, and

(b) a Party may provide that damages shall not be available against a
non-profit library, archive, educational institution, museum, or public
non-commercial broadcasting entity, if it sustains the burden of proving
that it was not aware or had no reason to believe that its acts constituted a
prohibited activity.

°° For greater certainty, a Party may, but is not required to, put in place separate remedies in respect of Article 14.64
(Protection of Technological Measures) and Article 14.65 (Protection of Rights Management Information), if those
remedies are available under its copyright law.

6° If a Party’s copyright law provides for both pre-established damages and additional damages, that Party may comply
with the requirements of this subparagraph by providing for only one of these forms of damages.

14-36

Article 14.87: Provisional Measures

1. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to order
prompt and effective provisional measures:

(a) against a party or, if appropriate, a third party over whom the relevant
judicial authority exercises jurisdiction, to prevent an infringement of any
intellectual property right from occurring, and in particular, to prevent
goods that involve the infringement of an intellectual property right from
entering into the channels of commerce; and

(b) to preserve relevant evidence in regard to the alleged infringement.

2. In the civil judicial proceedings described in Article 14.81 (Civil Enforcement and
Remedies for Trade Secrets), each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the
authority to order prompt and effective provisional measures, such as orders to prevent
the misappropriation of the trade secret and to preserve relevant evidence.

3. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to adopt
provisional measures inaudita altera parte if appropriate, in particular where any delay is
likely to cause irreparable harm to the right holder, or where there is a demonstrable risk
of evidence being destroyed. Each Party shall ensure that proceedings conducted inaudita
altera parte do not entail unwarranted delays.

4. In civil judicial proceedings concerning copyright or related rights infringement,
and trademark counterfeiting, each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have
the authority to order the seizure or other taking into custody of suspected infringing
goods, materials, and implements relevant to the infringement, and, at least for trademark
counterfeiting, documentary evidence relevant to the infringement.

5. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to require
the applicant for a provisional measure in respect of an intellectual property right to
provide any reasonably available evidence in order to satisfy the judicial authority, with a
sufficient degree of certainty, that the applicant’s right is being infringed or that the
infringement is imminent, or that the applicant’s trade secret is being misappropriated or
that the misappropriation is imminent, and to order the applicant to provide security or
equivalent assurance set at a level sufficient to protect the defendant and to prevent
abuse. That security or equivalent assurance shall not unreasonably deter recourse to
those procedures.

6. Each Party may provide that if the provisional measures are revoked, if they lapse
due to any act or omission by the applicant, or if it is subsequently found that there has
been no infringement of an intellectual property right or misappropriation of a trade
secret, its judicial authorities have the authority to order the applicant, upon request of the
defendant, to provide the defendant appropriate compensation for any injury caused by
these measures.

14-37

Article 14.88: Application to Administrative Procedures

To the extent that any civil remedy can be ordered as a result of administrative
procedures on the merits of a case, each Party shall provide that those procedures
conform to principles equivalent in substance to those set out in this Sub-Section.

Sub-Section J-2: Criminal Procedures and Penalties

Article 14.89: Wilful Counterfeiting and Piracy

1. Each Party shall provide for criminal procedures and penalties to be applied at
least in cases of wilful trademark counterfeiting or copyright or related rights piracy on a
commercial scale. In respect of wilful copyright or related rights piracy, “on a
commercial scale” includes at least:

(a) acts carried out for commercial advantage or financial gain; and

(b) significant acts, not carried out for commercial advantage or financial
gain, that have a substantial prejudicial impact on the interests of the
copyright or related rights holder in relation to the marketplace.°! ©

2. Each Party shall treat wilful importation or exportation of counterfeit trademark
goods or pirated copyright goods on a commercial scale as unlawful activities subject to
criminal penalties.©

3. Each Party shall provide for criminal procedures and penalties to be applied in
cases of wilful importation and domestic use, in the course of trade and on a
commercial scale, of a label or packaging:©

(a) to which a trademark has been applied without authorisation that is
identical to, or cannot be distinguished from, a trademark registered in its
territory; and

61 A Party may provide that the volume and value of any infringing items may be taken into account in determining
whether the act has a substantial prejudicial impact on the interests of the copyright or related nights holder in relation
to the marketplace.

6 The Parties affirm Article 14.4 (Nature and Scope of Obligations), which provides each Party the freedom to
determine the appropriate method of implementing the provisions of this Chapter within its own legal system and
practice. The Parties further understand that a Party may provide its judicial authorities with the authority to determine
whether an act is a significant act that has a substantial prejudicial impact on the interests of the copyright or the related
rights holder in relation to the marketplace.

63 The Parties understand that a Party may comply with its obligation under this paragraph by providing that
distribution or sale of counterfeit trademark goods or pirated copyright goods on a commercial scale is an unlawful
activity subject to criminal penalties. Furthermore, criminal procedures and penalties as specified in paragraphs 1, 2,
and 3 are applicable in any free trade zones in a Party.

64 A Party may comply with its obligation relating to importation of labels or packaging through its measures
concerning distribution.

65 A Party may comply with its obligations under this paragraph by providing for criminal procedures and penalties to
be applied to attempts to commit a trademark offence.

14-38

(b) that is intended to be used in the course of trade on goods or in relation to
services that are identical to goods or services for which that trademark is
registered.

Article 14.90: Unauthorised and Wilful Misappropriation of a Trade Secret

1. Subject to paragraph 2, each Party shall provide for criminal procedures and
penalties for the unauthorised and wilful misappropriation® of a trade secret.

2. With respect to the acts referred to in paragraph 1, a Party may, as appropriate,
limit the availability of its procedures, or limit the level of penalties available, to one or
more of the following cases in which the act is:

(a) for the purposes of commercial advantage or financial gain; or

(b) related to a product or service in national or international commerce.

Article 14.91: Prohibition of Unauthorised Disclosure or Use of a Trade Secret by
Government Officials Outside the Scope of Their Official Duties

1. Each Party shall, if trade secrets may be submitted to a court or government
entity, prohibit a government official at the central level of government from disclosing a
trade secret without authorisation and outside the scope of that person’s official duties.

2. Each Party shall provide for in its law deterrent-level penalties, including
monetary fines and imprisonment, to guard against the unauthorised disclosure of a trade
secret described in paragraph 1.

Article 14.92: Unauthorised Recording of a Cinematographic Work

Each Party may provide for criminal procedures and penalties to be applied in
accordance with its laws and regulations against a person who, without authorisation of
the theatre manager or the holder of the copyright in a cinematographic work, makes a
copy of that work or any part thereof, from a performance of the work in a motion picture
exhibition facility open to the public.

Article 14.93: Criminal Liability for Aiding and Abetting
With respect to the offences for which this Sub-Section requires a Party to

provide for criminal procedures and penalties, each Party shall ensure that criminal
liability for aiding and abetting is available under its law.

66 For the purposes of this Article, “wilful misappropriation” requires a person to have known that the trade secret was
acquired in a manner contrary to honest commercial practices.

14-39

Article 14.94: Criminal Enforcement

1. With respect to the offences described in Articles 14.89 (Wilful Counterfeiting
and Piracy) through 14.93 (Criminal Liability for Aiding and Abetting), each Party shall
provide:

(a) penalties that include sentences of imprisonment as well as monetary fines
sufficient to deter future acts of infringement, consistent with the level of
penalties applied for crimes of a corresponding gravity;°’

(b) that its judicial authorities have the authority, in determining penalties, to
account for the seriousness of the circumstances, which may include
circumstances that involve threats to, or effects on, health or safety;°®

(c) that its judicial or other competent authorities have the authority to order
the seizure of suspected counterfeit trademark goods or pirated copyright
goods, any related materials and implements used in the commission of
the alleged offence, documentary evidence relevant to the alleged offence,
and assets derived from or obtained through the alleged infringing activity.
If a Party requires identification of items subject to seizure as a
prerequisite for issuing a judicial order referred to in this subparagraph,
that Party shall not require the items to be described in greater detail than
necessary to identify them for the purpose of seizure;

(d) that its judicial authorities have the authority to order the forfeiture, at
least for serious offences, of any assets derived from or obtained through
the infringing activity;

(e) that its judicial authorities have the authority to order the forfeiture or
destruction of:

(1) all counterfeit trademark goods or pirated copyright goods;

(11) materials and implements that have been predominantly used in the
creation of pirated copyright goods or counterfeit trademark
goods; and

(111) | any other labels or packaging to which a counterfeit trademark has
been applied and that have been used in the commission of the
offence.

In cases in which counterfeit trademark goods and pirated copyright goods
are not destroyed, the judicial or other competent authorities shall ensure
that, except in exceptional circumstances, those goods are disposed of
outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to avoid causing
any harm to the right holder;

(f) that forfeiture or destruction under subparagraph (c) and subparagraph (e)
occur without compensation of any kind to the defendant;

67 The Parties understand that there is no obligation for a Party to provide for the possibility of imprisonment and
monetary fines to be imposed in parallel.

68 A Party may also account for those circumstances through a separate criminal offence.

14-40

(g) that its judicial or other competent authorities have the authority to release
or, in the alternative, provide access to, goods, material, implements, and
other evidence held by the relevant authority to a right holder for civil®
infringement proceedings; and

(h) that its competent authorities may act upon their own initiative to identify
a potential offence and report that potential offence to the right holder.

2. With respect to the offences described in Articles 14.89 (Wilful Counterfeiting
and Piracy) through 14.93 (Criminal Liability for Aiding and Abetting), a Party may
provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to order the seizure or forfeiture of
assets, or alternatively, a fine, the value of which corresponds to the assets derived from,
or obtained directly or indirectly through, the infringing activity.

Sub-Section J-3: Border and Other Measures

Article 14.95: Application by the Right Holder

1. Each Party shall provide for applications to suspend the release of, or to detain,
any suspected counterfeit trademark goods, confusingly similar trademark goods, or
pirated copyright goods that are imported into the territory of the Party.

2. Each Party shall provide that a right holder, submitting an application referred to
in paragraph | to initiate procedures for its competent authorities’° to suspend release of
suspected counterfeit trademark goods, confusingly similar trademark goods, or pirated
copyright goods into free circulation, is required to:

(a) provide adequate evidence to satisfy the competent authorities that, under
the law of the Party providing the procedures, there is prima facie an
infringement of the right holder’s intellectual property right; and

(b) supply sufficient information that may reasonably be expected to be within
the right holder’s knowledge to make the suspect goods reasonably
recognisable by its competent authorities.

The requirement to provide that evidence and information shall not unreasonably
deter recourse to these procedures.

6° A Party may also provide this authority in connection with administrative infringement proceedings.

7 For the purposes of this Sub-Section, unless otherwise specified, competent authorities may include the appropriate
judicial, administrative, or law enforcement authorities under a Party’s law.

14-41

3. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the authority to
require a right holder submitting an application referred to in paragraph 1 to provide a
reasonable security or equivalent assurance sufficient to protect the defendant and the
competent authorities, and to prevent abuse. Each Party shall provide that such security
or equivalent assurance does not unreasonably deter recourse to these procedures. A
Party may provide that the security may be in the form of a bond conditioned to hold the
defendant harmless from any loss or damage resulting from any suspension of the release
of goods in the event the competent authorities determine that the article is not an
infringing good.

4. Without prejudice to a Party’s law pertaining to privacy or the confidentiality of
information:

(a) if a Party’s competent authorities have detained or suspended the release
of goods that are suspected of being counterfeit trademark goods, or
pirated copyright goods, that Party may provide that its competent
authorities have the authority to inform the right holder without undue
delay of the names and addresses of the consignor, exporter, consignee, or
importer; a description of the goods; the quantity of the goods; and, if
known, the country of origin of the goods;”! or

(b) if a Party does not provide its competent authority with the authority
referred to in subparagraph (a) when suspect goods are detained or
suspended from release, it shall provide, at least in cases of imported
goods, its competent authorities with the authority to provide the
information specified in subparagraph (a) to the right holder normally
within 30 working days of the seizure or determination that the goods are
counterfeit trademark goods, or pirated copyright goods.

Article 14.96: Ex Officio Authority

Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities may initiate border
measures ex officio” with respect to goods under customs control’? that are:

(a) imported;

(b) destined for export; or

”| For greater certainty, a Party may establish reasonable procedures to receive or access that information.
” For greater certainty, that ex officio action does not require a formal complaint from a third party or right holder.

® For the purposes of this Sub-Section, a Party may treat goods under customs control as meaning goods that are
subject to a Party’s customs procedures.

14-42

(c) in transit”*”°,

and that are suspected of being counterfeit trademark goods or pirated copyright
goods.

Article 14.97: Determination of an Infringement

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain a procedure by which its competent authorities
may determine within a reasonable period of time after the initiation of the procedures
described in Article 14.95 (Application by the Right Holder) and Article 14.96 (Ex
Officio Authority), whether the suspect goods infringe an intellectual property right.’

2. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the authority to order
the destruction of goods following a determination that the goods are infringing. In cases
in which the goods are not destroyed, each Party shall ensure that, except in exceptional
circumstances, the goods are disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a
manner as to avoid any harm to the right holder. In regard to counterfeit trademark goods,
the simple removal of the trademark unlawfully affixed shall not be sufficient, other than
in exceptional cases, to permit the release of the goods into the channels of commerce.

Article 14.98: Fees

If a Party establishes or assesses, in connection with the procedures described in
this Sub-Section, an application fee, storage fee, or destruction fee, that fee shall not be
set at an amount that unreasonably deters recourse to these procedures.

Article 14.99: Application to Small Consignments

This Sub-Section also shall apply to goods of a commercial nature sent in small
consignments. A Party may exclude from the application of this Sub-Section small
quantities of goods of a non-commercial nature contained in travellers’ personal
luggage.””

™ This subparagraph applies to suspect goods that are in transit from one customs office to another customs office in
the Party’s territory from which the goods will be exported.

7 As an alternative to this subparagraph, a Party shall instead endeavour to provide, if appropriate and with a view to
eliminating international trade in counterfeit trademark goods or pirated copyright goods, available information to the
other Party in respect of goods that it has examined without a local consignee and that are transhipped through its
territory and destined for the territory of the other Party, to inform the other Party’s efforts to identify suspect goods
upon arrival in its territory.

76 A Party may comply with the obligation in this Article with respect to a determination that suspect goods under
Article 14.95 (Application by the Right Holder) and Article 14.96 (Ex Officio Authority) infringe an intellectual
property right through a determination that the suspect goods bear a false trade description.

” For greater certainty, a Party may also exclude from the application of this Sub-Section small quantities of goods of a
non-commercial nature sent in small consignments.

14-43

Article 14.100: Civil Remedies and Criminal Penalties for the Protection of
Encrypted Program-Carrying Satellite and Cable Signals

1. For the purpose of this Article, “signal” means an encrypted program-carrying
satellite or cable signal.

2. Each Party shall provide either civil remedies for right holders’* or criminal
penalties” against any person who:

(a) manufactures, imports, sells, leases, or otherwise distributes a device or
system that is primarily of assistance in decoding a signal without the
authorisation of the lawful distributor of that signal; or

(b) decodes a signal and further distributes*® that decoded signal without the
authorisation of the lawful distributor of the signal.

Section K: Final Provisions

Article 14.101: Technical Consultations

1. A Party shall not have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 24 (Dispute
Settlement) for a matter arising under this Chapter without first seeking to resolve the
matter in accordance with this Article.*!

2. A Party (the requesting Party) may request technical consultations with the other
Party (the responding Party) to discuss any matter arising under this Chapter which the
requesting Party considers might negatively affect their interests by delivering a written
request to the responding Party’s Contact Point. The request shall identify the reason for
the request, including a description of the requesting Party’s concerns about the matter.

3. A Party may have recourse to consultations under this Article without prejudice to
the commencement or continuation of cooperative activities under Section B:
Cooperation.

4. Upon a request pursuant to paragraph 2, the Parties shall consult each other within
the framework of the Committee established under Article 14.13 (Committee on
Intellectual Property) to consider ways of reaching a mutually satisfactory outcome.

5. Subject to Paragraph 6, unless the Parties decide otherwise, they shall enter
technical consultations no later than 30 days after the date of receipt of the request under
Paragraph 2.

78 For the purposes of this Article, “right holders” means any person that holds an interest in the signal or its content,
and that is injured by an act described in paragraph 2.

™ A Party may apply criminal penalties only to persons who wilfully commit the acts described in paragraph 2.
80 For greater certainty, a Party may interpret “further distribute” as “retransmit to the public”.

8! For greater certainty, this Article is without prejudice to the Parties undertaking alternative methods of dispute
resolution under Article 24.6 (Good Offices, Conciliation, or Mediation).

14-44

6. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods, technical
consultations shall commence within 15 days of the date of receipt of the request by the
other Party.

7. Consultations pursuant to this Article:

(a) may be held in person or by any technological means decided by the
Parties; and

(b) shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of a Party in
another proceeding.

8. Each Party shall:

(a) endeavour to provide sufficient information to enable a full examination of
the matter;

(b) ensure the appropriate involvement of relevant officials and competent
authorities in meetings held pursuant to this Article; and

(c) make every effort to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of the
matter, which may include appropriate cooperative activities.

9. The Parties may request advice, on terms decided by the Parties, from
independent experts to assist them.

10. If the Parties are able to resolve the matter, they shall document the
outcome, including, if appropriate, specific steps and timelines decided upon. The Parties

shall make the outcome available to the public, unless they decide otherwise.

11. If a matter referred to in paragraph 2 is a matter referred to in Article 24.3
(Dispute Settlement — Scope and Coverage) and has not been resolved within:

(a) 45 days after the date of receipt of the request for technical consultations;

(b) 25 days after the date of receipt of the request for technical consultations
for matters referred to in paragraph 6; or

(c) any other period as the Parties may decide,

the requesting Party may refer the matter to a panel pursuant to Article 24.7
(Dispute Settlement — Request for the Establishment of a Panel).

14-45

CHAPTER 15

COMPETITION POLICY AND STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES

Section A: Competition Policy

Article 15.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Section:

competition authority means an authority responsible for the enforcement of a Party’s
competition law;

enforcement proceeding means a proceeding! following an investigation into the alleged
contravention of the competition laws and regulations, and does not include the
consensual resolution of an issue between the competition authority and a person alleged
to have contravened competition laws and regulations, if the allegation made by the
competition authority is not contested;

Article 15.2: Objectives

1. The Parties recognise that anti-competitive business conduct including anti-
competitive mergers, and misleading or deceptive commercial activities, as outlined in
their respective competition or consumer protection laws and regulations, may distort the
proper functioning of markets and offset the benefits of this Agreement such as the
facilitation of trade and investment between the Parties.

2. The objectives of this Section are to promote fair marketplace competition and
enhance economic efficiency and consumer welfare. To this effect, the Parties shall
endeavour to take appropriate measures to proscribe anti-competitive business conduct,
including anti-competitive mergers, and misleading or deceptive commercial activities, to
implement policies promoting competition and consumer protection, and to enhance the
effectiveness of enforcement activities by cooperating on matters covered by this Section.

Article 15.3: Competition Laws and Authorities

1. Each Party shall maintain competition laws’ and regulations that proscribe anti-
competitive business conduct, including anti-competitive mergers, and shall take
appropriate action with respect to this conduct.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to apply its competition laws and regulations to all
commercial activities in its territory. This shall not prevent a Party from applying its
competition laws and regulations to a commercial activity outside its territory that have
an appropriate nexus to its jurisdiction.

' For Canada, this includes both a judicial and administrative proceeding.

> For greater certainty, the competition laws of a Party may be civil or criminal in nature.

15-1

3. Each Party may provide for an exclusion or exemption from the application of its
competition laws and regulations provided that the exclusion or exemption 1s transparent,
established in its law, and based on grounds of public policy or public interest.

4. Each Party shall maintain a competition authority and ensure independence in
decision-making by its competition authority or in relation to the enforcement of its
competition laws and regulations.

5. Each Party shall ensure that its competition authority enforces its competition
laws and regulations in accordance with the objectives set out in Article 15.2
(Objectives), and does not discriminate on the basis of nationality.

6. Each Party’s competition authority shall adopt or maintain measures to promote
the consideration of marketplace competition to their respective Party’s regulatory
authorities and any other administrative body at any level of government with regards to
the development, proposal or adoption of a regulatory measure.

Article 15.4: Procedural Fairness

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain publicly available procedures pursuant to
which its competition law investigations are conducted. If these investigations are not
subject to definitive deadlines, subject to its law, each Party shall ensure its competition
authority conducts its investigations within a reasonable time frame taking into account
circumstances including the nature and complexity of the investigation.

2. Each Party shall, if appropriate and legally permissible, ensure that its
competition authority informs a person that is the subject of an investigation as soon as
practicable. This information must include the legal basis for the investigation and the
alleged conduct under investigation. In determining the timing for informing a person of
an investigation, a Party’s competition authority may consider the status and specific
needs of the investigation.*

3. Each Party shall endeavour, if appropriate and legally permissible, to provide a
person who has been informed that they are the subject of an investigation, including
with regard to a merger or other conduct, with a reasonable opportunity for meaningful
and timely engagement on the relevant factual, legal, economic, and procedural issues,
according to the status and specific needs of the investigation.

4. Each Party shall provide, in accordance with its law, for the protection of
confidential information obtained by its competition authority during the investigative
process.

5. Each Party shall ensure that its competition authority does not state or imply in an
official communication to the public, revealing the existence of a pending or ongoing
investigation against a particular person that the person referred to in that communication
has in fact contravened the Party’s competition laws and regulations.

3 For greater certainty, such considerations may include the need to keep an investigation covert or to take immediate
action to mitigate further harm.

15-2

6. Each Party shall ensure that its competition authority affords to a person who has
allegedly contravened or is allegedly contravening a Party’s competition laws and
regulations a reasonable opportunity to be represented by legal counsel, including by:

(a) allowing, at that person’s request, counsel participation in a meeting or
enforcement proceeding between the competition authority and the
person’, and

(b) recognising a privilege, as acknowledged by its law, if not waived, for
lawful communications between the counsel and the person if the
communications concern the soliciting or rendering of legal advice.

7. Each Party’s competition authority shall maintain measures to preserve all
relevant evidence, including exculpatory evidence, that it collects as part of an
investigation until the investigation is discontinued or completed, or, if enforcement
proceedings are initiated, until the enforcement proceeding is complete and all appeals
are exhausted, or for any longer period of time set out in the Party’s laws and regulations.

8. Each Party shall ensure that before an independent and impartial judicial or
administrative body imposes an order? against a person for contravening its competition
laws and regulations, it affords that person a reasonable opportunity in accordance with
its law to:

(a) obtain timely access to non-privileged information about the competition
authority’s reason for the investigation, including identification of the
specific competition laws or regulations alleged to have been contravened;

(b) if that person contests the allegations in an enforcement proceeding,

(1) obtain timely access to non-privileged information that is
necessary to prepare an adequate defence. Confidential third-party
information shall only be provided to the person’s legal counsel,
and a competition authority is not obliged to produce information
that is not already in its possession or control;

(11) | be heard and present evidence in its defence before an independent
and impartial judicial or administrative body, including, if
applicable, to offer the analysis of a qualified expert, cross-
examine a testifying witness, and review and rebut evidence; and

(c) contest an allegation that the person has contravened competition laws and
regulations before an independent and impartial judicial or administrative
body.

except that a Party may provide for these opportunities within a reasonable time
after it imposes an interim measure.

4 For Canada, this excludes an ex parte proceeding, or a search of premises pursuant to a search warrant.

> For Canada this includes a sanction or remedy.

15-3

9. Each Party shall provide a person that is subject to an order imposed by an
independent and impartial judicial or administrative body® with the opportunity to seek
review of that order by a court or independent tribunal. For greater certainty, each Party
shall not be required to provide such opportunity if the person voluntarily agreed to the
imposition of that order.

10. Each Party shall ensure that its competition authority’ has the burden of
establishing the legal and factual basis for an alleged contravention of the Party’s
competition laws and regulations in an enforcement proceeding. A Party may require that
a person alleged to have contravened the Party’s competition laws and regulations has the
burden of establishing defence to the allegation.

11. Each Party shall authorise its competition authority® to resolve an alleged
contravention of its competition laws and regulations voluntarily by consent of the
competition authority’ and the person subject to the investigation. A Party may provide
for this voluntary resolution to be subject to approval by an independent judicial or
administrative body'® before becoming final.

12. Each Party shall adopt or maintain rules of procedure and evidence that apply to
an enforcement proceeding concerning alleged contravention of its competition laws and
regulations and the determination of an order by an independent and impartial judicial or
administrative body.'! These rules shall include procedures for introducing evidence,
including expert evidence if applicable, and shall apply equally to all persons subject to
an enforcement proceeding.

Article 15.5: Transparency

1. The Parties recognise the value of making their competition law enforcement
guidelines and competition advocacy policies as transparent as practicable.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its competitions laws, regulations, and enforcement
guidelines are publicly available.

3. On request of a Party, the other Party shall make available to the requesting Party
public information concerning:

(a) its competition law enforcement guidelines; and
(b) exemptions to its competition laws and regulations.

4. Each Party shall ensure that a final decision from an enforcement proceeding
finding a contravention of its competition laws and regulations sets out findings of fact
and the reasoning”’, including legal and, if applicable, economic analysis, on which the
decision is based.

6 For Canada this includes a sanction or remedy.

’ For Canada, this includes the public prosecutor for criminal prosecutions.
8 For Canada, this includes the public prosecutor for criminal prosecutions.
° For Canada, this includes the public prosecutor for criminal prosecutions.
‘0 For Canada, this may include an additional public comment period.

"| For Canada this includes a sanction or remedy.

'2 For Canada, this does not apply to jury trials.

15-4

5. Each Party shall ensure that a final decision referred to in paragraph 4 and any
order implementing that decision are published, or if publication is not practicable, made
publicly available in a manner that enables an interested person or the other Party to
become acquainted with them.

6. Each Party shall ensure that a decision or an order that is published or made
publicly available is redacted to the extent necessary in order to be consistent with that
Party’s laws and regulations regarding confidentiality, privilege and any other applicable
exceptions, including the need to safeguard the confidentiality of the information on the
grounds of public policy or public interest.

Article 15.6: Confidentiality

1. Each Party shall have publicly available rules, policies, or guidance regarding the
identification and treatment of confidential information that comes into the possession of
the competition authority.

2. If a third party seeks to obtain access to confidential information in the possession
of the competition authority, the competition authority shall generally oppose, within
their reasonably available resources, the disclosure of confidential information protected
under its Party’s law.

Article 15.7: Consumer Protection

1. The Parties recognise the importance of consumer protection law to enhancing
consumer trust in the free trade area. The Parties recognise that the enforcement of
consumer protection laws is in the public interest and is necessary to fulfil the objectives
of this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain laws! or other measures to proscribe
misleading or deceptive commercial activities, including false or misleading descriptions.

3. The Parties recognise that the enforcement of consumer protection laws is in the
public interest.

Article 15.8: Cooperation on Competition and Consumer Protection

1. The Parties recognise that anti-competitive business conduct and mergers, and
misleading or deceptive commercial activities increasingly transcend borders and that
cooperation and coordination between the Parties to support enforcement of competition
laws and regulations, and consumer protection laws and measures is important and in the
public interest.

2. Each Party’s competition authority shall endeavour to cooperate:

(a) in any area of competition policy by discussing or exchanging information
on its development and implementation; and

'3 For greater certainty, the laws of a Party may be civil or criminal in nature.

15-5

(b) on any issue relating to the enforcement of competition laws and
regulations, including exchange of information, investigative and
enforcement assistance, and consultation and coordination on any cross-
border investigation.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to promote cooperation and coordination on any
matter of mutual interest related to misleading or deceptive commercial activity,
including in the enforcement of a Party’s laws or other measures related to misleading or
deceptive commercial activity, the exchange of information, and any joint public
awareness initiative.

4. A Party’s competition or consumer protection authority may consider entering
into a cooperation arrangement or agreement with the respective authority of the other
Party that sets out decided terms of cooperation.

5. Recognising that the Parties can benefit by sharing their diverse experience in
developing, administering, and enforcing their competition and consumer protection
laws, regulations, and policies, the Parties may undertake technical cooperation activities,
including:

(a) providing advice or training on any relevant issue;

(b) exchanging information and experience on competition advocacy and
consumer protection policy, including ways to promote a culture of
competition; and

(c) assisting a Party as it implements a new competition or consumer
protection law, regulation, or measure.

6. The Parties shall cooperate on matters set out in this Article in a manner
compatible with their respective law, regulations, policies, and mutual interests, and
within their reasonably available resources. Information shared pursuant to this Article
may be subject to additional requirements by the Party sharing the information, including
confidentiality or restriction on the purposes for which the information will be used.

Article 15.9: Consultations

1. In order to foster understanding between the Parties, or to address a specific
matter that arises under this Section, on written request of the other Party, a Party shall
enter into consultations with the requesting Party. In its request, the requesting Party shall
indicate, if relevant, how the matter affects trade or investment between the Parties.

2. The Party responding to the request pursuant to paragraph 1 shall accord full and
sympathetic consideration to the concerns of the requesting Party.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to provide relevant non-confidential, non-privileged
information to the other Party to facilitate the discussion regarding the matter of
consultations.

15-6

Article 15.10: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) does not apply to any matter arising under this
Section.

Section B: State-Owned Enterprises

Article 15.11: Delegated Authority

Each Party shall ensure that when its state-owned enterprises or state enterprises
as applicable exercise any regulatory, administrative, or other governmental authority that
the Party has directed or delegated to such entities to carry out, those entities act in a
manner that is not inconsistent with that Party’s obligations under this Agreement.

Article 15.12: Definitions
For the purposes of this Section :

Arrangement means the Arrangement on Officially Supported Export Credits, developed
within the framework of the organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), or a successor undertaking, whether developed within or outside of the OECD
framework, that has been adopted by at least 12 original WTO Members that were
Participants to the Arrangement as of | January 1979;

commercial activities means activities that an enterprise undertakes with an orientation
toward profit-making and that result in the production of a good or supply of a service
that will be sold to a consumer in the relevant market in quantities and at prices
determined by the enterprise. Activities undertaken by an enterprise that operates on a
not-for-profit basis or on a cost-recovery basis are not activities undertaken with an
orientation toward profit-making. Measures of general application to the relevant market
shall not be construed as the determination by a Party of pricing, production, or supply
decisions of an enterprise;

commercial considerations means price, quality, availability, marketability,
transportation, and other terms and conditions of purchase or sale, or other factors that
would normally be taken into account in the commercial decisions of a privately owned
enterprise in the relevant business or industry;

covered state-owned enterprise means a state-owned enterprise that has had an annual
revenue derived from its commercial activities of no less than the threshold amount in
Annex 15-A (Threshold Calculation) in each of its three most recent fiscal years of
operation so that the obligations in Article 15.14 (Non-discriminatory Treatment and
Commercial Considerations) apply to it;

financial service supplier of a Party, financial institution, and financial service have
the same meaning as in Article 10.1 (Financial Services — Definitions);

independent pension fund means an enterprise that is owned, or controlled through
ownership interests, by a Party that:

(a) is principally engaged in the following activities:

(1) administering or providing a plan for pension, retirement, social
security, disability, death, or employee benefits, or any
combination thereof for the benefit of natural persons who are
contributors to such a plan and their beneficiaries; or

15-7

(b)

(c)

(11) investing the assets of these plans;

has a fiduciary duty to the natural persons referred to in
subparagraph (a)(1) or to depositors representing these natural persons; and

is not subject to investment direction from the government of the Party.
Investment direction from the government of a Party does not include
general guidance with respect to risk management and asset allocation that
is not inconsistent with usual investment practice and is not demonstrated
solely by the presence of government officials on the enterprise’s board of
directors, or investment panel;

market means the geographical and commercial market for a good or service;

public service mandate means a government mandate pursuant to which a state-owned
enterprise makes available a service, directly or indirectly, to the general public in its
territory. A service to the general public includes the distribution of goods and the supply
of general infrastructure services; and

state-owned enterprise means an enterprise that is principally engaged in commercial
activities in which a Party:

(a)
(b)

(c)

directly owns more than 50 per cent of the share or subscribed capital;

controls, through direct or indirect ownership interests, the exercise of
more than 50 per cent of the voting rights. For the purposes of this
definition, the term “indirect ownership interests” refers to situations in
which a Party holds an ownership interest in an enterprise through one or
more state-owned enterprises or state enterprises as applicable of that
Party. At each level of the ownership chain, the state-owned enterprise or
state enterprise as applicable — either alone or in combination with other
state-owned enterprises or state enterprises as applicable — must own, or
control through ownership interests, another enterprise.

holds the power to control the enterprise through any other ownership
interest, including indirect or minority ownership. For greater clarity of the
establishment of control, all relevant legal and factual arrangements shall
be taken into account on a case-by-case basis; or

15-8

(d) holds the power to appoint a majority of members of the board of
directors, board of commissioners or any other equivalent management
body.

Article 15.13: Scope

1. This Section applies to the activities of state-owned enterprises of a Party that
affect trade or investment between the Parties within the free trade area.

2. This Section does not apply to:

(a) the regulatory or supervisory activities, or monetary and related credit
policy and exchange rate policy, of a central bank or monetary authority of
a Party;

(b) the regulatory or supervisory activities of a financial regulatory body of a
Party, including a non-governmental body, such as a securities or futures
exchange or market, clearing agency, or other organisation or association,
that exercises regulatory or supervisory authority over financial services
suppliers of a Party; or

(c) activities undertaken by a Party or one of its state-owned enterprises or
state enterprises as applicable for the purpose of the resolution of a failing
or failed financial institution or any other failing or failed enterprise
principally engaged in the supply of financial services.

3. This Section does not apply with respect to an independent pension fund of a
Party, or an enterprise owned or controlled by an independent pension fund of a Party.

4. This Section does not apply to government procurement.

5. This Section does not apply to those activities of state-owned enterprises of a
Party which are necessary to national defence and security.

6. This Section applies to the activities of state-owned enterprises owned or
controlled by the central government of a Party.

7. Nothing in this Section prevents a state-owned enterprise of a Party from
providing goods or services exclusively to that Party for the purposes of carrying out that
Party’s governmental functions.

8. Nothing in this Section prevents a Party from establishing or maintaining a state-
owned enterprise or state enterprise as applicable.

Article 15.14: Non-discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations

1. Each Party shall ensure that each of its state-owned enterprises, when engaging in
commercial activities:

(a) acts in accordance with commercial considerations in its purchase or sale
of a good or service, except to fulfil any terms of its public service
mandate that are not inconsistent with subparagraph (c)(11);

15-9

(b) in its purchase of a good or service:

(1) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise of the other
Party treatment no less favourable than it accords to a like good or
a like service supplied by enterprises of the Party or of any non-
Party; and

(11) accords to a good or service supplied by an enterprise that is a
covered investment in the Party’s territory treatment no less
favourable than it accords to a like good or a like service supplied
by enterprises in the relevant market in the Party’s territory that are
investments of investors of the Party or of any non-Party; and

(c) in its sale of a good or service:

(1) accords to an enterprise of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than it accords to enterprises of the Party or of any non-
Party; and

(11) | accords to an enterprise that is a covered investment in the Party’s
territory treatment no less favourable than it accords to enterprises
in the relevant market in the Party’s territory that are investments
of investors of the Party, or of any non-Party.

2. Paragraph 1 does not apply with respect to the purchase or sale of shares, stock, or
other forms of equity by a state-owned enterprise as means of its equity participation in
another enterprise.

3. Subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c) do not preclude a state-owned enterprise from:

(a) purchasing or selling goods or services on different terms or conditions
including those relating to price; or

(b) refusing to purchase or sell goods or services, provided that such
differential treatment or refusal is undertaken in accordance with
commercial considerations.

Article 15.15: Regulatory Framework

1. The Parties shall endeavour to make the best use of relevant international best
practices in governing state-owned enterprises, including the OECD Guidelines on
Corporate Governance of State-Owned Enterprises.

2. Each Party shall ensure that any administrative body that the Party establishes or
maintains exercises its regulatory authority in an impartial manner with respect to the
enterprises that it regulates, including enterprises that are not state-owned enterprises.
The impartiality with which an administrative body exercises its regulatory authority is to
be assessed by reference to a pattern or practice of that administrative body.

15-10

Article 15.16: Transparency

1. Each Party shall provide to the other Party or otherwise make publicly available
on an official website a list of its covered state-owned enterprises, and thereafter shall
update its list annually:

(a) for Canada, Canada shall provide its initial list upon the entry into force of
this Agreement; and

(b) for Indonesia, Annex 15-D (Initial List of Covered State-Owned
Enterprises for Indonesia) sets out its initial list.

2. On the written request of the other Party, a Party shall promptly provide the
following information concerning a state-owned enterprise, provided that the request
includes an explanation of how the activities of the entity may be affecting trade or
investment between the Parties:

(a) the percentage of shares that the Party, its state-owned enterprises
cumulatively own, and the percentage of votes that they cumulatively
hold, in the entity;

(b) a description of any special shares or special voting or other rights that the
Party, its state-owned enterprises hold, to the extent these rights are
different than the rights attached to the general common shares of the
entity;

(c) the government titles of any government official serving as an officer or
member of the entity’s board of directors or board of commissioners;

(d) the entity’s annual revenue and total assets over the most recent three-year
period for which information is available;

(e) any exemptions and immunities from which the entity benefits under the
Party’s law; and

(f) any additional information regarding the entity that is publicly available,
including annual financial reports and third-party audits, and that is sought
in the written request.

3. When a Party provides written information pursuant to a request made under
paragraph 2 and informs the requesting Party that it considers the information to be
confidential, the requesting Party shall not disclose the information without prior consent
of the Party providing the information.

Article 15.17: Technical Cooperation

The Parties shall, if appropriate and subject to available resources, engage in
mutually agreed technical cooperation activities, including:

(a) exchanging information regarding Parties’ experiences in improving the
corporate governance and operation of their state-owned enterprises;

(b) sharing best practices on policy approaches to ensure a level playing field

between state-owned and privately-owned enterprises, including policies
related to competitive neutrality;

15-11

(c) organising international seminars, workshops, or any other appropriate
forum for sharing technical information and expertise related to the
governance and operations of state-owned enterprises; and

(d) collaborating on matters related to state-owned enterprises and
competitive neutrality in international bodies or agreements.

Article 15.18: Technical Consultations

1. The Parties shall seek to resolve any concerns arising from the implementation of
this Section through technical consultations pursuant to this Article prior to initiating
dispute settlement pursuant to Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement). The objective of the
technical consultations is to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of the concerns.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, any Party may make a written request to the
other Party to hold technical consultations that shall identify:

(a) the matter or measure at issue;
(b) provisions of this Section to which the concerns are related; and

(c) the reasons for the request, including a description of the requesting
Party’s concerns regarding the measures or matters.

3. At the request of either Party, the Parties shall hold technical consultations to
discuss the concerns raised in the request, in person or by any technological means that
the Parties decide. If the Parties decide to hold technical consultations in person, the
meeting shall be held in the capital of the requested Party, unless the Parties agree
otherwise.

4. The Parties shall endeavour to resolve the matter as expeditiously as possible
within 60 calendar days from the date of receipt of the request. If the requesting Party
believes that the matter is urgent and requires immediate settlement, it may request from
the other Party resolution within a shorter time frame. In such cases, the requested Party
shall give positive consideration to such a request.

5. A Party may request or exchange further information relevant to paragraph 2, and
the information obtained or communications between the Parties under this Article shall
be confidential unless the Parties agree otherwise.

6. The Parties shall notify the Joint Committee of any resolution reached between
the Parties as a result of technical consultations under this Article. Neither Party shall use
the resolution reached between the Parties against the other Party in any further
proceedings under, or outside the framework of, this Agreement.

Article 15.19: Contact Points
Each Party shall designate a contact point on State-Owned Enterprises and notify

the other Party to facilitate communications between the Parties on any matter covered by
this Section.

15-12

Article 15.20: Party-Specific Annexes

Article 15.14 (Non-discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations)
does not apply with respect to the non-conforming activities of state-owned enterprises
that a Party lists in its Schedule to Annex 15-C (Non-Conforming Activities) in
accordance with the terms of the Party’s Schedule.

Article 15.21: Exceptions

1. Nothing in Article 15.14 (Non-discriminatory Treatment and Commercial
Considerations), shall be construed to:

(a) prevent the adoption or enforcement by a Party of measures to respond
temporarily to a national or global economic emergency; or

(b) apply to a state-owned enterprise with respect to which a Party has
adopted or enforced measures on a temporary basis in response to a
national or global economic emergency, for the duration of that
emergency.

2. Article 15.14.1 (Non-discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations)
does not apply for the supply of financial services by a state-owned enterprise pursuant to
a government mandate if that supply of financial services:

(a) supports exports or imports, provided that these services are:
(1) not intended to displace commercial financing; or

(11) offered on terms no more favourable than those that could be
obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial
market.

(b) supports private investment outside the territory of the Party, provided that
these services are:

(1) not intended to displace commercial financing; or

(11) offered on terms no more favourable than those that could be
obtained for comparable financial services in the commercial
market; or

(c) is offered on terms consistent with the Arrangement, provided that it falls
within the scope of the Arrangement.

3. In circumstances in which no comparable financial services are offered in the
commercial market referred to in paragraph 2:

(a) for the purposes of sub-subparagraphs 2(a)(i) and 2(b)(1), the supply of the
financial services is deemed not to be intended to displace commercial
financing; and

(b) for the purposes of sub-subparagraphs 2(a)(i1) and 2(b)(11), the state-owned
enterprise may rely on available information to establish a benchmark on
the terms on which such services would be offered in the commercial
market.

15-13

4. Article 15.14 (Non-discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations)
and Article 15.16 (Transparency) do not apply to any service supplied in the exercise of
governmental authority. For the purposes of this paragraph, “a service supplied in the
exercise of governmental authority” has the same meaning as in GATS, including the
meaning in the Financial Services Annex if applicable.

5. Article 15.14 (Non-discriminatory Treatment and Commercial Considerations)
and Article 15.16 (Transparency) do not apply with respect to a state-owned enterprise if
in any one of the three previous consecutive fiscal years, the annual revenue derived from
the commercial activities of the state-owned enterprise was less than a threshold amount
which must be calculated in accordance with Annex 15-A (Threshold Calculation) and in
conformity with Annex 15-D (Initial List of Covered State-Owned Enterprises for
Indonesia).

6. Article 15.14.1(b), Article 15.14.1(c), (Non-discriminatory Treatment and
Commercial Considerations) do not apply to the extent that a Party’s state-owned
enterprise makes purchases and sales of goods or services pursuant to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that the Party maintains, continues,
renews, or amends in accordance with paragraphs | or 2 of Article 13.18
(Investment — Non-Conforming Measures and Exceptions), paragraphs 1
or 2 of Article 8.7 (Trade in Services — Reservations), or Article 10.10.1
(Financial Services — Non-Conforming Measures), as set out in its
Schedule to Annex I-A (Reservations for Existing Measures - ratchet),
Annex I-B (Reservations for Existing Measures - standstill), or in Section
A of its Schedule to Annex III; or

(b) any non-conforming measure that the Party adopts or maintains with
respect to sectors, subsectors, or activities in accordance with Article
13.18.3 (Investment — Non-Conforming Measures and Exceptions),
Article 8.7.3 (Trade in Services — Reservations), or Article 10.10.2
(Financial Services — Non-Conforming Measures), as set out in its
Schedule to Annex II (Reservations for Future Measures), or in Section B
of its Schedule to Annex III.

7. When a Party invokes the exception referred to in paragraph 5 during
consultations under Article 24.5 (Dispute Settlement — Consultations), the consulting
Parties should exchange and discuss available evidence concerning the annual revenue of
the state-owned enterprise derived from the commercial activities during the three
previous consecutive fiscal years in an effort to resolve during the consultations period
any disagreement regarding the application of the exception.

Article 15.22: Process for Developing Information

Annex 15-B (Process for Developing Information Concerning State-Owned
Enterprises) applies in any dispute under Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) regarding a
Party’s conformity with Article 15.14 (Non-discriminatory Treatment and Commercial
Considerations).

15-14

CHAPTER 16

GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT

Article 16.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

Committee means the Committee on Government Procurement established under
Article 16.22 (Committee on Government Procurement);

construction service means a service that has as its objective the realisation by whatever
means of civil or building works, based on Division 51 of the United Nations Provisional
Central Product Classification (CPC);

in writing or written means any worded or numbered expression that can be read,
reproduced and later communicated. It may include electronically transmitted and stored
information;

limited tendering means a procurement method whereby the procuring entity contacts a
supplier or suppliers of its choice;

multi-use list means a list of suppliers that a procuring entity has determined satisfy the
conditions for participation in that list, and that the procuring entity intends to use more
than once;

notice of intended procurement means a notice published by a procuring entity inviting
interested suppliers to submit a request for participation, a tender, or both;

procuring entity means:

(a) for Canada, an entity that is listed in Canada’s Annex | to Appendix I of
the WTO Agreement on Government Procurement; and

(b) for Indonesia, an entity that is undertaking covered procurement;

qualified supplier means a supplier that a procuring entity recognises as having satisfied
the conditions for participation;

selective tendering means a procurement method whereby only qualified suppliers are
invited by the procuring entity to submit a tender;

supplier means a person or group of persons that provides or could provide goods or
services;

technical specification means a tendering requirement that:
(a) lays down the characteristics of goods or services to be procured,
including quality, performance, safety and dimensions, or the processes

and methods for their production or provision; or

(b) addresses terminology, symbols, packaging, marking, or labelling
requirements, as they apply to a good or service; and

16-1

WTO Agreement on Government Procurement means the Annex to the Protocol
Amending the Agreement on Government Procurement, done at Geneva
on 30 March 2012, as amended.

Article 16.2: Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are to:
(a) reinforce transparency of laws, regulations, and procedures;
(b) ensure integrity;
(c) encourage the use of electronic means;
(d) encourage the use of environmental and socio-economic considerations;

(e) encourage the participation of Small and Medium Sized Enterprises
(SMEs); and

(f) develop cooperation between the Parties,

in respect of government procurement.

Article 16.3: Scope
Application of Chapter

1. This Chapter applies to any measure regarding covered procurement, whether or
not it is conducted exclusively or partially by electronic means.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, covered procurement means:

(a) for Canada, procurement that is covered procurement under the WTO
Agreement on Government Procurement by a procuring entity. If the
WTO Agreement on Government Procurement does not apply to a
measure of Canada’s with respect to a covered procurement, this Chapter
also does not apply to that measure; and

(b) for Indonesia, government procurement! conducted by the central
government level if the procurement is expressly open to international
competition as provided in Indonesia’s laws and regulations.

' For the purposes of this Article, for Indonesia, government procurement means the process by which a government
obtains the use of or acquires goods or services, or any combination thereof, for governmental purposes and not with a
view to commercial sale or resale or use in the production or supply of goods or services for commercial sale or resale
as provided in Indonesia’s laws and regulations.

16-2

Activities not Covered
3. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) the acquisition or rental of land, existing buildings or other immovable
property or the rights thereon;

(b) non-contractual agreements or any form of assistance that a Party,
including its procuring entities, provides, including cooperative
agreements, grants, loans, equity infusions, guarantees, subsidies, fiscal
incentives and sponsorship arrangements;

(c) the procurement or acquisition of fiscal agency or depository services,
liquidation and management services for regulated financial institutions or
services related to the sale, redemption and distribution of public debt,
including loans and government bonds, notes and other securities;

(d) public employment contracts; or
(e) procurement conducted:

(1) for the specific purpose of providing international assistance,
including development aid;

(11) under the particular procedure or condition of an international
organisation, or funded by international grants, loans or other
assistance; or

(111) | under the particular procedure or condition of an international
agreement relating to the stationing of troops or relating to the joint
implementation by the signatory countries of a project.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from developing
new procurement policies, procedures, or contractual means, provided that they are not
inconsistent with this Chapter.

Article 16.4: Security and General Exceptions

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from taking any
action or not disclosing any information that it considers necessary for the protection of
its essential security interests relating to the procurement of arms, ammunition or war
materials, or to procurement indispensable for national security or for national defence
purposes.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or
maintaining a measure:

(a) necessary to protect public morals, order or safety;

(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

16-3

(c) necessary to protect intellectual property; or

(d) relating to a good or service of a person with disabilities, of philanthropic
institutions, or of prison labour.

Article 16.5: General Principles
Use of Electronic Means
1. If conducting covered procurement by electronic means, a procuring entity shall:

(a) ensure that the procurement is conducted using information technology
systems and software, including those related to authentication and
encryption of information, that are generally available and interoperable
with other generally available information technology systems and
software; and

(b) establish and maintain mechanisms that ensure the integrity of information
provided by a supplier, including requests for participation and tenders,
including establishment of the time of receipt and the prevention of
inappropriate access.

Conduct of Procurement

2. A procuring entity shall conduct covered procurement in a transparent manner
that is consistent with this Chapter.

Article 16.6: Publication of Procurement Information

1. Each Party shall promptly publish any law, regulation, judicial decision,
administrative ruling of general application, standard contract clause mandated by law or
regulation and incorporated by reference in notices or tender documentation and
procedure regarding covered procurement, and any modifications thereof, in an officially
designated electronic or paper medium that is widely disseminated and remains readily
accessible to the public.

2. Each Party shall list in Annex 16-A (Publication Media), the paper or electronic
means through which the Party publishes the information referred to in paragraph | and
the electronic medium where the Party publishes notices required by Article 16.8
(Notices), Article 16.9.3 (Qualification of Suppliers) and Article 16.15.2 (Transparency
of Procurement Information).

3. Each Party shall, on request, respond to an inquiry relating to the information
referred to in paragraph 1.

4. Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party of any modification to the Party’s
information listed in Annex 16-A (Publication Media).

16-4

Article 16.7: Ensuring Integrity in Procurement Practices

1. Each Party shall ensure that criminal, civil, or administrative measures exist to
address corruption, fraud, and other wrongful acts in its government procurement.

2. The measures referred to in paragraph 1 may include procedures to render
ineligible from participation in a Party’s procurements, for a stated period of time, a
supplier that the Party has determined to have engaged in corruption, fraud, or other
wrongful acts relevant to a supplier’s eligibility to participate in the Party’s government
procurement.

3. Each Party shall ensure that it has in place measures to address potential conflicts
of interest on the part of those engaged in or having influence over a procurement.

Article 16.8: Notices
Notice of Intended Procurement

1. For each covered procurement, a procuring entity shall publish a notice of
intended procurement, except in the circumstances referred to in Article 16.13 (Limited
Tendering). Each notice of intended procurement shall be published by electronic means
free of charge through a single point of access and shall remain readily accessible to the
public, at least until expiration of the time period indicated in the notice.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, each notice of intended
procurement shall include the following information, unless that information is provided
in tender documentation that is made available free of charge to all interested suppliers at
the same time as the notice of intended procurement:

(a) the name and address of the procuring entity and other information
necessary to contact the procuring entity and obtain all relevant documents
relating to the procurement, and their cost and terms of payment, if any;

(b) a description of the procurement, including the nature and the quantity of
the goods or services to be procured or, where the quantity is not known,
the estimated quantity;

(c) a description of any options;

(d) the time-frame for delivery of goods or services or the duration of the

contract;

(e) the procurement method that will be used and whether it will involve
negotiation;

(f) if applicable, the address and any final date for the submission of requests

for participation in the procurement;
(g) the address and the final date for the submission of tenders;
(h) the language or languages in which tenders or requests for participation

may be submitted, if they may be submitted in a language other than an
official language of the Party of the procuring entity;

16-5

(1) a list and brief description of any conditions for participation of suppliers,
including any requirements for specific documents or certifications to be
provided by a supplier in connection therewith, unless those requirements
are included in tender documentation that is made available to all
interested suppliers at the same time as the notice of intended
procurement; and

(j) if, pursuant to Article 16.9 (Qualification of Suppliers), a procuring entity
intends to select a limited number of qualified suppliers to be invited to
tender, the criteria that will be used to select them and, if applicable, any
limitation on the number of suppliers that will be permitted to tender.

Summary Notice

3. For each case of intended procurement, a procuring entity shall publish a
summary notice that is readily accessible, at the same time as the publication of the notice
of intended procurement. The summary notice shall contain at least the following
information:

(a) the subject matter of the procurement;
(b) the final date for the submission of tenders or, if applicable, any final date
for the submission of requests for participation in the procurement or for

inclusion on a multi-use list; and

(c) the address from which documents relating to the procurement may be
requested.

4. For the purposes of this Chapter, each Party shall endeavour to use English as the
language for publishing the summary notice and the notice of intended procurement.

Notice of Planned Procurement

5. Procuring entities are encouraged to publish in the appropriate paper or electronic
medium listed in Annex 16-A (Publication Media) as early as possible in each fiscal year
a notice regarding their future procurement plans (notice of planned procurement). The
notice of planned procurement should include the subject matter of the procurement and
the planned date of the publication of the notice of intended procurement.

Article 16.9: Qualification of Suppliers

Registration Systems and Qualification Procedures

1. A Party, including its procuring entities, may maintain a supplier registration
system under which interested suppliers are required to register and provide certain
information.

2. Each Party shall ensure that:

(a) its procuring entities make efforts to minimise differences in their
qualification procedures; and

(b) if its procuring entities maintain registration systems, the entities make
efforts to minimise differences in their registration systems.

16-6

Selective Tendering
3. If a procuring entity intends to use selective tendering, the procuring entity shall:

(a) include in the notice of intended procurement at least the information
specified in Article 16.8.2(a), (b), (e), (f), (1), and (j) (Notices) and invite
suppliers to submit a request for participation; and

(b) provide, by the commencement of the time period for tendering, at least
the information in Article 16.8.2(c), (d), (g), and (h) (Notices) to qualified
suppliers.

4. A procuring entity shall allow all qualified suppliers to participate in a particular
procurement, unless the procuring entity states in the notice of intended procurement any
limitation on the number of suppliers that will be permitted to tender and the criteria for
selecting the limited number of suppliers.

5. If the tender documentation is not made publicly available from the date of
publication of the notice referred to in paragraph 3, a procuring entity shall ensure that
those documents are made available at the same time to all the qualified suppliers
selected in accordance with paragraph 4.

Multi-Use Lists

6. A Party, including its procuring entities, may establish or maintain a multi-use list
provided that it publishes annually, or otherwise makes continuously available by
electronic means, a notice inviting interested suppliers to apply for inclusion on the list.

7. The notice provided for in paragraph 6 shall include:

(a) a description of the goods or services, or categories thereof, for which the
list may be used;

(b) the conditions for participation to be satisfied by a supplier for inclusion
on the list and the methods that the procuring entity will use to verify that
a supplier satisfies the conditions;

(c) the name and address of the procuring entity and other information
necessary to contact the procuring entity and obtain all relevant documents
relating to the list; and

(d) the period of validity of the list and the means for its renewal or
termination, or if the period of validity is not provided, an indication of the
method by which notice will be given of the termination of use of the list.

8. A Party, including its procuring entities, that establishes or maintains a multi-use

list, shall include on the list, within a reasonable period of time, all suppliers that satisfy
the conditions for participation set out in the notice referred to in paragraph 6.

16-7

9. If a supplier that is not included on a multi-use list submits a request for
participation in a procurement based on the multi-use list and submits all required
documents within the time period set by the procuring entity, a procuring entity shall
examine the request. The procuring entity shall not exclude the supplier from
consideration in respect of the procurement unless the procuring entity is not able to
complete the examination of the request within the time period allowed for the
submission of tenders.

Information on Procuring Entity Decisions

10. A procuring entity shall promptly inform any supplier that submits a request for
participation in a procurement or application for inclusion on a multi-use list of the
procuring entity’s decision with respect to the request or application.

11.‘ If a procuring entity rejects a supplier’s request for participation in a procurement
or application for inclusion on a multi-use list, ceases to recognise a supplier as qualified,
or removes a supplier from a multi-use list, the procuring entity shall promptly inform the
supplier and, on request of the supplier, promptly provide the supplier with a written
explanation of the reasons for its decision.

Article 16.10: Technical Specifications and Tender Documentation
Technical Specifications

1. In prescribing the technical specifications for the goods or services being
procured, a procuring entity shall, if appropriate, set out the technical specification in
terms of performance and functional requirements, rather than design or descriptive
characteristics.

2. If design or descriptive characteristics are used in a technical specification, a
procuring entity should indicate, if appropriate, that it will consider tenders of equivalent
goods or services that demonstrably fulfil the requirements of the procurement by
including words such as “or equivalent” in the tender documentation.

3. A procuring entity shall not prescribe technical specifications that require or refer
to a particular trademark or trade name, patent, copyright, design, type, specific origin,
producer or supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently precise or intelligible way of
describing the procurement requirements and provided that, in those cases, the procuring
entity includes words such as “or equivalent” in the tender documentation.

4. A procuring entity shall not seek or accept, in a manner that would have the effect
of precluding competition, advice that may be used in the preparation or adoption of any
technical specification for a specific procurement from a person that may have a
commercial interest in the procurement.

5. For greater certainty, a Party, including its procuring entities, may, in accordance

with this Article, prepare, adopt, or apply technical specifications to promote the
conservation of natural resources, or protect the environment.

16-8

6. For greater certainty, this Chapter is not intended to preclude a Party, or its
procuring entities, from preparing, adopting or applying technical specifications required
to protect sensitive government information, including specifications that may affect or
limit the storage, hosting or processing of that information outside the territory of the
Party.

Tender Documentation

7. A procuring entity shall promptly make available or provide on request to any
interested supplier tender documentation that includes all information necessary to permit
the supplier to prepare and submit a responsive tender. Unless already provided in the
notice of intended procurement, tender documentation shall include a complete
description of:

(a) the procurement, including the nature and the quantity of the goods or
services to be procured or, if the quantity is not known, the estimated
quantity and any requirements to be fulfilled, including any technical
specifications, conformity assessment certification, plans, drawings or
instructional materials;

(b) any conditions for participation of suppliers, including any financial
guarantees, information, and documents that suppliers are required to
submit in connection with the conditions for participation;

(c) all evaluation criteria the procuring entity will apply in the awarding of the
contract, and, unless price is the sole criterion, the relative importance of
those criteria;

(d) if the procuring entity will conduct the procurement by electronic means,
any authentication and encryption requirements or other requirements
related to the submission of information by electronic means;

(e) if there will be a public opening of tenders, the date, time, and place for
the opening, and, if appropriate, the persons authorised to be present;

(f) any other terms or conditions, including terms of payment and any
limitation on the means by which tenders may be submitted, such as
whether on paper or by electronic means; and

(g) any date for delivery of goods or the supply of services.

8. In establishing any date for the delivery of goods or the supply of services being
procured, a procuring entity shall take into account factors such as the complexity of the
procurement, the extent of subcontracting anticipated and the realistic time required for
production, de-stocking, and transport of goods from the point of supply or for supply of
services.

9. The evaluation criteria set out in the notice of intended procurement or tender
documentation may include, among others, price and other cost factors, quality, technical
merit, environmental characteristics, socio-economic considerations, and terms of
delivery.

16-9

10. A procuring entity shall promptly reply to any reasonable request for relevant
information by an interested or participating supplier, provided that the information does
not give that supplier an advantage over other suppliers.

Modifications

11. If, prior to the award of a contract, a procuring entity modifies the evaluation
criteria or requirements set out in the notice of intended procurement or tender
documentation provided to a participating supplier, or amends or reissues a notice or
tender documentation, it shall publish or provide those modifications, or the amended or
re-issued notice or tender documentation:

(a) to all suppliers that are participating in the procurement at the time of the
modification, amendment or reissuance, if those suppliers are known to
the procuring entity, and in all other cases, in the same manner as the
original information was made available; and

(b) in adequate time to allow those suppliers to modify and re-submit their
tenders, if appropriate.

Article 16.11: Time Periods

A procuring entity shall, consistent with its own reasonable needs, provide
sufficient time for suppliers to prepare and submit requests for participation and
responsive tenders, taking into account such factors as:

(a) the nature and complexity of the procurement;
(b) the extent of subcontracting anticipated; and

(c) the time necessary for transmitting tenders by non-electronic means from
foreign as well as domestic points if electronic means are not used.

The time periods, including any extension of the time periods, shall be the same
for all interested or participating suppliers.

Article 16.12: Negotiation
1. A Party may provide for its procuring entities to conduct negotiations, if:

(a) the procuring entity has indicated its intent to conduct negotiations in the
notice of intended procurement required under Article 16.8.2(e) (Notices);

(b) it appears from the evaluation that no tender is obviously the most
advantageous in terms of the specific evaluation criteria set out in the
notice of intended procurement or tender documentation; or

(c) there is only one supplier that submits a bid, and that particular supplier
has met the evaluation criteria.

16-10

2. A procuring entity shall:

(a)

(b)

ensure that any elimination of a supplier participating in negotiations is
carried out in accordance with the evaluation criteria set out in the notice
of intended procurement or tender documentation; and

if negotiations are concluded, provide a common deadline for the
remaining participating suppliers to submit any new or revised tenders.

Article 16.13: Limited Tendering

1. A procuring entity may use limited tendering and may choose not to apply
Article 16.8 (Notices), Article 16.9 (Qualification of Suppliers), paragraphs 7 to 11 of
Article 16.10 (Technical Specifications and Tender Documentation), Article 16.11 (Time
Periods), Article 16.12 (Negotiation), or Article 16.14 (Treatment of Tenders and
Awarding of Contracts) only under any of the following circumstances:

(a)

(b)

if:
(1) no tenders were submitted or no suppliers requested participation;

(11) no tenders that conform to the essential requirements of the tender
documentation were submitted;

(111) no suppliers satisfied the conditions for participation; or
(iv) the tenders submitted have been collusive,

provided that the requirements of the tender documentation are not
substantially modified;

if the goods or services can be supplied only by a particular supplier and

no reasonable alternative or substitute goods or services exist for any of

the following reasons:

(1) the requirement is for a work of art;

(11) the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive rights; or

(111) | due to an absence of competition for technical reasons;

for additional deliveries by the original supplier of goods or services that

were not included in the initial procurement, if a change of supplier for

those additional goods or services:

(1) cannot be made for economic or technical reasons such as
requirements of interchangeability or interoperability with existing
equipment, software, services or installations procured under the

initial procurement; and

(11) would cause significant inconvenience or substantial duplication of
costs for the procuring entity;

16-11

(d)

(e)
(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

insofar as is strictly necessary if, for reasons of extreme urgency brought
about by events unforeseeable by the procuring entity, the goods or
services could not be obtained in time using other tendering methods;

for goods purchased on a commodity market;

if a procuring entity procures a prototype or a first good or service that is
developed at its request in the course of, and for, a particular contract for
research, experiment, study or original development. Original
development of a first good or service may include limited production or
supply in order to incorporate the results of field testing and to
demonstrate that the good or service is suitable for production or supply in
quantity to acceptable quality standards, but does not include quantity
production or supply to establish commercial viability or to recover
research and development costs;

for purchases made under exceptionally advantageous conditions that only
arise in the very short term in the case of unusual disposals such as those
arising from liquidation, receivership or bankruptcy, but not for routine
purchases from regular suppliers;

if a contract is awarded to a winner of a design contest provided that:

(1) the contest has been organised in a manner that is consistent with
the principles of this Chapter;

(11) the participants are judged by an independent jury with a view to a
design contract being awarded to a winner;

for legal consultancy services, including the services of an advocate or
arbitrator, the need for which was previously unseen by the parties to a
legal proceeding but which are required to assist those parties in promptly
addressing certain matters that have arisen in the context of those
proceedings and cannot be postponed; or

if an additional construction service that was not included in the initial
contract, but that is within the objectives of the original tender
documentation, has become necessary, due to unforeseeable
circumstances, to complete the construction service described in the
original tender documentation.

2. A procuring entity shall prepare a report in writing on each contract awarded
under paragraph 1. The report shall include the name of the procuring entity, the value
and kind of goods or services procured, and a statement indicating the circumstances and
conditions described in paragraph | that justified the use of limited tendering.

16-12

Article 16.14: Treatment of Tenders and Awarding of Contracts
Treatment of Tenders

1. A procuring entity shall receive, open, and treat all tenders under procedures that
guarantee the fairness of the procurement process and the confidentiality of tenders.

2. A procuring entity shall not penalise any supplier whose tender is received after
the time specified for receiving tenders if the delay is due solely to mishandling on the
part of the procuring entity.

3. If a procuring entity provides a supplier with an opportunity to correct
unintentional errors of form between the opening of tenders and the awarding of the
contract, the procuring entity shall provide the same opportunity to all participating
suppliers.

Awarding of Contracts

4. To be considered for an award, a tender shall be submitted in writing and shall, at
the time of opening, comply with the essential requirements set out in the notices and
tender documentation and be from a supplier that satisfies the conditions for
participation.

5. Unless a procuring entity determines that it is not in the public interest to award a
contract, the procuring entity shall award the contract to the supplier that the procuring
entity has determined to be capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract and that, based
solely on the evaluation criteria specified in the notices and tender documentation, has
submitted:

(a) the most advantageous tender; or

(b) if price is the sole criterion, the lowest price.
6. If a procuring entity receives a tender with a price that is abnormally lower than
the prices in other tenders submitted, it may verify with the supplier that it satisfies the

conditions for participation and is capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract.

7. A procuring entity shall not use options, cancel a procurement, or modify awarded
contracts in a manner that circumvents the obligations under this Chapter.

Article 16.15: Transparency of Procurement Information
Information Provided to Suppliers

1. A procuring entity shall promptly inform participating suppliers of the procuring
entity’s contract award decisions and, on the request of a supplier, shall do so in writing.
Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 16.16 (Disclosure of Information), a procuring
entity shall, on request, provide an unsuccessful supplier with an explanation of the
reasons why the procuring entity did not select the supplier’s tender and the relative
advantages of the successful supplier’s tender.

16-13

Publication of Award Information

2. A procuring entity shall publish a contract award notice in the appropriate paper
or electronic medium listed in Annex 16-A (Publication Media). If the procuring entity
publishes the notice only in an electronic medium, the information shall remain readily
accessible for a reasonable period of time. The notice shall include at least the following
information:

(a) a description of the goods or services procured;
(b) the name and address of the procuring entity;
(c) the name and address of the successful supplier;

(d) the value of the successful tender or the highest and lowest offers taken
into account in the award of the contract;

(e) the date of award; and

(f) the type of procurement method used, and in cases where limited
tendering was used in accordance with Article 16.13 (Limited Tendering),
a description of the circumstances justifying the use of limited tendering.

Maintenance of Records

3. Each procuring entity shall maintain the documentation, records and reports
relating to tendering procedures and contract awards for covered procurement, including
the records and reports provided for in Article 16.13 (Limited Tendering) for a period of
at least three years from the date it awards a contract.

Article 16.16: Disclosure of Information
Provision of Information

1. On request of the other Party, a Party shall promptly provide information
sufficient to demonstrate whether a procurement was conducted fairly and in accordance
with this Chapter, including information on the characteristics and relative advantages of
the successful tender, without disclosing confidential information. If release of the
information would prejudice competition in future tenders, the Party that receives the
information shall not disclose it to any supplier, except after consulting with, and
obtaining the agreement of, the Party that provided the information.

Non-Disclosure of Information

2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a Party, including its
procuring entities, shall not disclose information that would prejudice fair competition
between suppliers.

3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party, including its
procuring entities, authorities and review bodies, to disclose confidential information if

that disclosure:

(a) would impede law enforcement;

16-14

(b) might prejudice fair competition between suppliers;

(c) would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular persons,
including the protection of intellectual property; or

(d) would otherwise be contrary to the public interest.

Article 16.17: Environmental and Socio-economic Considerations
1. The Parties recognise the role of government procurement in:

(a) advancing environmental and climate change objectives, including those
set out in the Paris Agreement, done at Paris on 12 December 2015; and

(b) achieving socio-economic objectives.
2. For greater certainty, a Party, including its procuring entities, may take into
account environmental or socio-economic considerations in the procurement process,

including through conditions for participation, technical specifications, or evaluation
criteria.

Article 16.18: Contact Points

1. Exchange of information and cooperation under this Chapter shall be facilitated
through the following contact points:

(a) for Canada, the Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and
Development; and

(b) for Indonesia, the National Public Procurement Agency.

2. Each Party shall notify the other Party of any change to its contact point.

Article 16.19: Facilitation of Participation by Small and Medium Sized Enterprises
1. The Parties recognise the important contribution that SMEs can make to
economic growth and employment and the importance of facilitating the participation

of SMEs in government procurement.

2. If a Party maintains a measure that provides preferential treatment for SMEs, the
Party shall ensure that the measure, including the criteria for eligibility, is transparent.

3. To facilitate participation by SMEs in covered procurement, each Party shall, to
the extent possible and if appropriate:

(a) provide comprehensive procurement-related information that includes a
definition of SMEs in a single electronic portal;

16-15

(b) endeavour to make all tender documentation available free of charge;

(c) conduct procurement by electronic means or through other new
information and communication technologies;

(d) consider the size, design, and structure of the procurement, including the
use of subcontracting by SMEs; and

(e) promote prompt payment upon satisfactory provision of the goods or
services.

Article 16.20: Cooperation

The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation in helping to ensure the
effective implementation of this Chapter. Taking into account available and existing
instruments, resources, and mechanisms, the Parties shall cooperate and exchange
information, including through networks, seminars, and workshops, on matters such as:

(a) exchanging information, to the extent possible, on each Party’s laws,
regulations, and procedures, and any modifications thereof;

(b) encouraging inclusive and sustainable procurement practices;

(c) sharing experiences on the use of electronic means in government
procurement systems;

(d) facilitating participation by suppliers in government procurement, in
particular with respect to SMEs;

(e) sharing best practices on facilitating the participation of suppliers in
government procurement; and

(f) building capability of government officials in best government
procurement practices.

Article 16.21: Further Negotiations

If, after the entry into force of this Agreement, a Party enters into an international
agreement that provides greater access to its government procurement market than is
provided to the other Party under this Chapter, at the request of the other Party, the
Parties shall enter into negotiations regarding the extension of that access to the other
Party. The negotiations may also cover other provisions in this Chapter.

16-16

Article 16.22: Committee on Government Procurement

The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Government Procurement
(Committee), composed of government representatives of each Party. On request of a
Party, the Committee shall meet to discuss issues, such as:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)

ways to facilitate cooperation between relevant entities of the Parties in
the field of government procurement;

ways to facilitate participation by SMEs in covered procurement, as
provided for in Article 16.19 (Facilitation of Participation by Small and
Medium Sized Enterprises);

experiences and best practices in the use of government procurement
measures to advance environmental, climate change, and socio-economic
objectives when conducting covered procurement;

the government procurement opportunities in each Party; and

any other matters related to the implementation and operation of this
Chapter.

Article 16.23: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) does not apply to any matter arising under this

Chapter.

16-17

CHAPTER 17

TRADE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Section A: General Provisions

Article 17.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

environmental laws means a law or regulation of a Party or provisions thereof, enforced
by that Party’s central government, the primary purpose of which is the protection of the
environment or the prevention of a danger to human life or health from environmental
impacts. Environmental laws does not include a law or regulation of a Party or provisions
thereof directly related to worker safety or health, nor any law or regulation of a Party or
provisions thereof, the primary purpose of which is managing the subsistence, or
traditional or aboriginal harvesting of natural resources;

ILO Declaration on Rights at Work means the International Labour Organisation
(ILO) Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its
Follow-Up (1998), as amended in 2022;

ILO Declaration on Social Justice means LO Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair
Globalisation (2008), as updated in 2022;

labour laws means laws and regulations, or provisions of laws and regulations, of a Party
that are directly related to the rights and principles set out in Article 17.25.1 and
Article 17.25.2 (General Obligations); and

specially protected natural areas means those areas as defined by each Party in its law.

Article 17.2: Objective and Scope

1. The Parties affirm their commitment to pursue sustainable development, which
encompasses the three inter-dependent and mutually reinforcing dimensions of economic
development, social development, and environmental protection. Accordingly, the Parties
shall promote trade and economic flows that contribute to enhancing decent work, high
levels of environmental protection, and inclusive economic growth, including by:

(a) promoting mutually supportive trade and environmental policies and the
effective enforcement of environmental laws, and enhancing the capacities
of the Parties to address trade-related environmental issues;

(b) promoting the effective protection and enforcement of labour rights,
improving working conditions, and strengthening cooperation on labour
issues; and

(c) advancing women’s economic empowerment and incorporating women-

sensitive considerations into their trade and investment policies and
initiatives.

17-1

2. The Parties underline the benefit of cooperation on trade-related environmental
issues as part of a global approach to trade and sustainable development. The Parties
recognise that eradicating poverty is indispensable to sustainable development and that
trade can be an engine for inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction.

3. The Parties agree on the importance of enhanced dialogue and cooperation on
issues of common interest for the effective implementation of this Chapter in order to
achieve sustainable development and to improve their trade relationship in a sustainable
manner, taking into account the differences in their respective levels of development,
national priorities, and circumstances.

4. The Parties emphasise that the implementation of this Chapter should be
consistent with each Party’s obligations under the relevant international agreements to
which it is a party.

Article 17.3: Right to Regulate and Levels of Protection

1. The Parties recognise that each Party has the right to determine its sustainable
development objectives and priorities, to establish its levels of protection, and to adopt
and modify its laws and policies accordingly, based on relevant international standards
and consistent with international agreements to which the Party is a party, while taking
into consideration the Parties’ respective economic development capacities.

2. The Parties further recognise that a Party’s environmental and labour laws should
not be applied in a manner that would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable
discrimination or as a disguised restriction on trade or investment between the Parties.

3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to authorise a Party to enforce its laws
in the territory of the other Party.

Article 17.4: Public Awareness
Each Party shall promote public awareness of its laws, regulations, and policies

relating to the environment, labour, protection of the rights of women, and equality
between women and men, by making relevant information available to the public.

Article 17.5: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) does not apply to any matter arising under this
Section.

17-2

Section B: Trade and Environment

Article 17.6: Context and Objectives

1. The Parties recognise that economic development, social development, and
environmental protection are interdependent and mutually reinforcing components of
sustainable development.

2. Accordingly, the Parties shall endeavour to promote mutually supportive trade
and environmental policies, promote high levels of environmental protection and
effective enforcement of environmental laws, and enhance the capacities of the Parties to
address trade-related environmental issues through cooperation, to further sustainable
development.

3. The Parties recognise that the environment plays an important role in the
economic, social, and cultural well-being of Indigenous Peoples', and acknowledge the
importance of their engagement in the long-term conservation and sustainable use of the
environment.

Article 17.7: Right to Regulate and Levels of Protection

1. The Parties recognise the right of each Party to establish its own environmental
priorities and levels of protection, and to establish, adopt, or modify its environmental
laws and policies accordingly.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that its environmental laws and policies
provide for and encourage high levels of environmental protection, and to continue to
improve its levels of environmental protection.

3. Each Party shall take into account, to the extent appropriate and practical, relevant
scientific and technical information, and related international standards, guidelines, or
recommendations when preparing and implementing environmental laws and policies
that may affect trade or investment between the Parties.

4. The Parties recognise that their respective environmental laws and policies are
informed by key principles, including the polluter pays principle, and the sustainable
utilisation of natural resources for the well-being of the people.

5. Each Party shall promote public awareness of its environmental laws including its

enforcement and compliance procedures, by making relevant information available to the
public.

' Indigenous Peoples refers to:

(a) for Canada, Aboriginal peoples (including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples) as defined in
subsection 35(2) of the Constitution Act, 1982 of Canada;
(b) for Indonesia, Masyarakat Hukum Adat in accordance with Indonesia’s laws and regulations.

17-3

Article 17.8: Enforcement of Environmental Laws

1. A Party shall not fail to effectively enforce its environmental laws through a
sustained or recurring course of action or inaction’ in a manner affecting trade or
investment between the Parties, after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

2. Each Party retains the right to exercise discretion and to make decisions
regarding: (a) investigatory, prosecutorial, regulatory, and compliance matters; and (b)
the allocation of environmental enforcement resources with respect to other
environmental laws determined to have higher priorities. Accordingly, the Parties
understand that with respect to the enforcement of environmental laws, a Party is in
compliance with paragraph | if a course of action or inaction reflects a reasonable
exercise of that discretion, or results from a bona fide decision regarding the allocation of
those resources in accordance with priorities for enforcement of its environmental laws.

3. Each Party shall ensure that an interested person of that Party may request that the
Party’s competent authorities investigate alleged violations of its environmental laws, and
that the competent authorities give those requests due consideration, in accordance with
the Party’s law.

4. Each Party shall ensure that persons with a recognised interest under its law in a
particular matter have appropriate access to administrative, quasi-judicial, or judicial
proceedings for the enforcement of the Party’s environmental laws, and the right to seek
appropriate remedies or sanctions for violations of those laws.

5. Without prejudice to Article 17.3 (Right to Regulate and Levels of Protection),
the Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage trade or investment by
weakening or reducing the protection afforded in their respective environmental laws.
Accordingly, a Party shall not waive or otherwise derogate, or offer to waive or otherwise
derogate, from its environmental laws in a manner that weakens or reduces the protection
afforded in those laws in order to encourage trade or investment between the Parties.

6. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to authorise a Party to enforce its
environmental laws in the territory of the other Party.

Article 17.9: Procedural Matters

1. Each Party shall ensure that administrative, quasi-judicial, or judicial proceedings
for the enforcement of the Party’s environmental laws are available under its law and that
those proceedings are fair, equitable, transparent, and comply with the due process of
law. The Parties recognise that their respective proceedings should be accessible, and not
entail unreasonable fees or time limits.

2. Each Party affirms the principles of impartiality and independence in the
administration of justice in the enforcement of its environmental laws. Hearings in a
Party’s enforcement proceedings shall be open to the public, except when the
administration of justice otherwise requires, and in accordance with the Party’s law.

> For greater certainty, a “sustained or recurring course of action or inaction” is “sustained” if the course of action or
inaction is consistent or ongoing, and is “recurring” if the course of action or inaction occurs periodically or repeatedly
and when the occurrences are related or the same in nature. A course of action or inaction does not include an isolated
instance or case.

17-4

3. Each Party shall provide that final decisions on the merits of the case in these
proceedings are:

(a) in writing, and if appropriate state the reasons on which the decisions are
based;

(b) made available without undue delay to the parties to the proceedings and,
in accordance with its law, to the public; and

(c) based on information or evidence submitted by the parties to the
proceedings or other sources, in accordance with its law.

4. Each Party shall also provide, as appropriate, that parties to the proceedings have
the right, in accordance with the Party’s law, to seek review and, if warranted, correction
or redetermination, of final decisions in those proceedings.

5. Each Party shall provide appropriate sanctions or remedies for violations of its
environmental laws and shall ensure that it takes account of relevant factors which may,
in accordance with the Party’s law, include the nature and gravity of the violation,
damage to the environment, and any economic benefit derived by the violator, when
ordering sanctions or remedies.

Article 17.10: Environmental Impact Assessment

Each Party shall maintain appropriate procedures for assessing the impacts of
proposed projects that are subject to an action by that Party’s central level of government
that may cause significant environmental effects, with a view to avoiding, minimising, or
mitigating adverse effects.

Article 17.11: Multilateral Environmental Agreements

1. The Parties recognise the important role of multilateral environmental
agreements, to which they are both party, in protecting the environment and as
instruments to achieve global environmental objectives including on sustainable
development. To this end, the Parties commit to enhance the mutual supportiveness
between trade and the multilateral environmental agreements to which they are both

party.

2. Each Party affirms its commitment to implement its obligations under the
multilateral environmental agreements to which it is party.

3. At the meetings of the Environment Sub-Committee, the Parties shall exchange,
as appropriate, information on trade-related environmental issues of mutual interest and
on their respective ratification and implementation of multilateral environmental
agreements, including their protocols and amendments, to which they are both party.

17-5

Article 17.12: Climate Change

1. The Parties recognise:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

that climate change is an urgent threat that requires immediate and
enhanced individual and collective action to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions in line with the best available science, and acknowledge efforts
by the Parties in meeting their nationally determined contributions (NDC)
targets;

in pursuit of the objective of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, done at New York on 9 May, 1992 (UNFCCC), the
importance of tackling climate change by strengthening the full and
effective implementation of the Paris Agreement, and its temperature goal,
reflecting equity and the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities, in light of different national
circumstances;

the importance of mutually supportive trade, investment, and climate
change policies in pursuing the objective of the UNFCCC and the Paris
Agreement, including the transition to net-zero emissions and a
climate-resilient economy;

the importance of mitigating and adapting to the effects of climate change
through increased investment in nature-based solutions and ecosystem-
based approaches; and

the important contributions from all segments of society in addressing and
responding to climate change.

2. Accordingly, each Party:

(a)

(b)

(c)

shall implement its obligations under the Paris Agreement, noting the
importance of NDCs and pursuing climate action measures and policies in
order to reduce GHG emissions;

affirms its commitment to a collective goal of reducing global
anthropogenic GHG emissions, and to transition to net zero GHG
emissions; and

shall endeavour to find innovative trade-related climate measures and
market-based approaches to complement non-market-based approaches as
provided in the Paris Agreement to mitigate and adapt to the effects of
climate change.

3. The Parties shall cooperate on trade-related climate change issues bilaterally,
regionally, and in international forums, as appropriate.

Article 17.13: Circular Economy and Plastic Pollution

1. The Parties recognise that enhancing resource efficiency, education, public
awareness, and circular economy approaches contribute to adopting sustainable
consumption and production patterns and addressing pollution across the full lifecycle of

plastic.

17-6

2. The Parties recognise the importance of taking action to prevent, reduce, and
mitigate the costs and impacts of plastic pollution and waste, including microplastics, in
order to protect human health and the environment.

3. Accordingly, each Party shall endeavour to adopt or maintain measures to prevent
and reduce plastic pollution and waste, including microplastics.

Article 17.14: Responsible Business Conduct and Corporate Social Responsibility

1. Each Party recognises that enterprises organised or constituted under its laws, or
operating in its territory, play a key role in supporting sustainable trade and can
contribute to addressing global environmental challenges such as climate change,
biodiversity loss, and pollution.

2. The Parties further recognise the important role of responsible business conduct
and corporate social responsibility in addressing environmental impacts including
through sustainable supply chain management, due diligence practices, and the promotion
of a circular economy.

3. Each Party shall encourage enterprises organised or constituted under its laws or
operating in its territory to implement principles and standards of responsible business
conduct and corporate social responsibility with respect to the environment, consistent
with internationally recognised standards and guidelines that have been endorsed or are
supported by that Party.

Article 17.15: Voluntary Mechanisms to Enhance Environmental Performance

1. The Parties recognise that voluntary mechanisms, such as sustainability schemes
and auditing and reporting, can contribute to the achievement and maintenance of high
levels of environmental protection and social and economic development, and can
complement domestic regulatory measures. The Parties also recognise that voluntary
mechanisms should not be designed in a manner that would constitute a means of
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination, and should avoid the creation of unnecessary
barriers to trade.

2. Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws, regulations, or policies, encourage
private sector entities, non-governmental organisations, and other interested persons in its
territory to:

(a) develop and use voluntary mechanisms to protect the environment and
contribute to sustainable development; and

(b) develop and improve criteria used to evaluate environmental performance
of voluntary mechanisms.

3. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate and share information and best practices
on the development and use of voluntary mechanisms that promote products based on
their environmental qualities, and that:

(a) take into account relevant scientific and technical information;

(b) are not misleading;

(c) are based on relevant international standards, recommendations,
guidelines, or best practices, as appropriate; and

17-7

(d) do not treat a product less favourably on the basis of origin.

Article 17.16: Biodiversity and Trade

1. The Parties recognise the importance of ensuring the conservation and the
sustainable use of biological diversity, including the ecosystem services it provides. The
Parties further recognise the potential of trade in supporting conservation and sustainable
use of biodiversity in achieving sustainable development and the objectives of this
Chapter, consistent with the Convention on Biological Diversity, done at Rio de Janeiro
on 5 June 1992 (CBD), the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora, done at Washington, D.C. on 3 March 1973 (CITES), and other
relevant international instruments to which each Party is party.

2. The Parties recognise the importance of respecting, preserving, and maintaining
knowledge and practices of Indigenous Peoples? and rural or remote communities
embodying traditional lifestyles, that contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of
biological diversity in accordance with their respective laws.

3. The Parties recognise the importance of facilitating access to genetic resources
based on the principles of fair and equitable sharing of benefits within each Party’s
respective national jurisdiction, consistent with their respective international obligations.
The Parties further recognise that each Party may require, through national measures,
prior informed consent to access genetic resources in accordance with national measures
and, if access is granted, the establishment of mutually agreed terms, including with
respect to the sharing of benefits from the use of genetic resources, between users and
providers.

4. The Parties recognise that the movement of terrestrial and aquatic invasive alien
species across borders which may come through trade-related pathways can negatively
impact the environment, economic activities and development, and human health. The
Parties also recognise that critical strategies such as risk analysis, prevention, control,
detection, early response and management, and, if possible, eradication of invasive alien
species, can mitigate those impacts.

5. The Parties affirm the importance of ensuring the legality and sustainability of
wildlife trade as regulated and facilitated under CITES and that trade should not threaten
the survival of the species in the wild. The Parties recognise that illegal trade undermines
efforts to conserve and sustainably manage those natural resources and has negative
economic, social, and environmental impacts.

6. Accordingly, each Party shall:

(a) promote and encourage the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity, in accordance with its laws, regulations, or policies;

(b) adopt, maintain, and implement laws, regulations, and any other measures

to fulfil its obligations under the CITES and endeavour to implement
CITES resolutions; and

3 Indigenous Peoples refers to:

(a) for Canada, Aboriginal peoples (including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples) as defined in
subsection 35(2) of the Constitution Act, 1982 of Canada;
(b) for Indonesia, Masyarakat Hukum Adat in accordance with Indonesia’s laws and regulations.

17-8

(c) adopt or maintain appropriate measures to protect and conserve wild fauna
and flora that it has identified to be at risk within its territory, including
measures to conserve the ecological integrity of specially protected natural
areas, such as grasslands and wetlands.

7. The Parties shall work together to strengthen their cooperation on trade-related
aspects of matters covered by this Article, bilaterally, regionally, and in international
forums, as appropriate, including under the CBD and the CITES.

Article 17.17: Sustainable Agriculture and Trade

1. The Parties recognise the importance of a productive, sustainable, and inclusive
agricultural sector in building resilient and economically sustainable communities;
improving food security by enhancing production of, access to, and availability of food;
protecting and conserving land, water resources, and biodiversity; and mitigating climate
change. The Parties further recognise the role of trade in pursuing these objectives.

2. The Parties also recognise the increasing impact that global challenges, such as
loss of biodiversity, land degradation, extreme weather events, emergence of new pests
and diseases, and climate change, have on the agricultural sector.

3. The Parties further recognise that sustainable agriculture objectives may be
achieved through different approaches, due to the diversity and complexity of agricultural
and food production conditions globally.

4. The Parties further recognise that their respective agricultural sustainability
policies and programmes should be consistent with each Party’s international trade
obligations, while supporting the adoption of new and innovative technologies across the
value chain with the aim of increasing agricultural production and agri-food trade.

5. Accordingly, each Party shall ensure that its agricultural sustainability policies,
programs and other measures are non-discriminatory and not applied in a manner that
constitutes a disguised restriction on agriculture and agri-food trade.

6. Each Party shall, as appropriate:

(a) ensure that agricultural sustainability policies, programmes, and other
measures are outcome-based, and are based on relevant scientific and
technical information; and

(b) aim to enhance the transparency of its environmental policies, programs,
and other measures pertaining to agricultural production.

7. The Parties shall cooperate, as appropriate, to promote sustainable agriculture and

food security, including by exchanging information and best practices, facilitating trade
and investment, and encouraging the adoption of new and innovative technologies.

17-9

Article 17.18: Sustainable Management of Fisheries and Aquaculture and Trade‘

1. The Parties recognise:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

their role as consumers, producers, and traders of marine fisheries and
aquaculture products, and that sustainably managed fisheries and
aquaculture operations contribute to sustainable development;

the importance of marine fisheries and aquaculture to the livelihoods of
coastal communities, and programs that support fishers and fish farmers,
and those engaged in artisanal, small-scale, or Indigenous fisheries;

the importance of implementing measures to sustainably manage fisheries
and aquaculture operations, and to conserve and protect marine
ecosystems; and

the importance of promoting and facilitating trade in sustainably and
legally caught fish and seafood products, and of preventing illegal,
unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing products from entering trade
flows; and

the need for action within international forums to address overfishing,
protect marine biological resources and their ecosystems, and to promote
the sustainable utilisation and management of global fisheries resources.

2. Accordingly, each Party shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

operate and promote a sustainable marine fisheries management
framework that regulates marine wild capture fishing in a manner that
promotes sustainable utilisation, and is consistent with relevant
international instruments;

adopt or maintain conservation and management measures to promote the
long-term conservation of fish stocks, sharks, marine turtles, seabirds, and
marine mammals, including bycatch mitigation measures and shark
finning prohibitions, as appropriate;

adopt or maintain measures, as appropriate, with the aim to effectively
combat IUU fishing and prevent IUU products from entering trade flows;

4 For greater certainty, this Article only applies to marine fisheries and marine aquaculture.

> These instruments include, as they may apply, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, done at Montego
Bay on 10 December 1982, the United Nations Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, done at New York on 4 December 1995, the FAO Code of
Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, done at Rome on 31 October 1995, and the 2001 International Plan of Action to
Prevent, Deter, and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing, done at Rome on 2 March 2001.

17-10

(d) implement port state measures, consistent with the Food and Agriculture
Organisation (FAO) Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter
and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, done at
Rome on 22 November 2009, and other relevant instruments, including the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, done at Montego Bay
on 10 December 1982, and the United Nations Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks,
done at New York on 4 December 1995;

(e) implement, as appropriate, catch documentation schemes consistent with
the FAO Voluntary Guidelines for Catch Documentation, done at Rome in
July 2017;

(f) participate constructively in the work of regional fisheries management
organisations or arrangements of which it is a member, observer, or
cooperating non-contracting party to combat and deter IUU fishing and to
support sustainable fisheries, ecosystems, and effective governance, and
strive to act consistently with relevant conservation and management
measures; and

(g) | with regard for each Party’s unique national circumstances, promote
efforts to strengthen international rules that address harmful fisheries
subsidies, including through cooperation at the WTO to support fisheries
subsidy transparency, notification, and compliance requirements.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to promote the development of sustainable and
responsible aquaculture, taking into account its economic, social, and environmental
aspects, including the implementation of the objectives and principles contained in the
FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries.

4. The Parties shall work together to strengthen their cooperation on trade-related
matters covered by this Article, bilaterally, regionally, and in international forum, as
appropriate, including at the WTO, the FAO, and in regional fisheries management
organisations.

Article 17.19: Sustainable Forest Management and Trade

1. The Parties recognise the importance of conservation and sustainable
management of forests in contributing to the Parties’ economic, environmental, and
social objectives, and for the benefits of present and future generations.

2. The Parties further recognise the critical role of forests in providing numerous
ecosystem services, including carbon storage, maintaining water quantity and quality,
stabilising soils, and providing habitat for wild fauna and flora.

3. The Parties recognise the importance of combatting illegal logging and associated

trade. The Parties also acknowledge the efforts undertaken by each Party to enhance trade
in forest products sourced from sustainably managed forests.

17-11

4. Accordingly, each Party shall endeavour to:

(a) maintain or strengthen government capacity and institutional frameworks
to promote the conservation and sustainable management of forests;

(b) encourage bilateral trade in forest products from sustainably managed
forests, harvested in accordance with the Parties’ respective laws;

(c) exchange information and experiences on mechanisms and trade-related
initiatives relating to trade in forest products from sustainably managed
forests; and

(d) | promote transparency in forest products supply chains.

5. The Parties shall work together bilaterally, regionally, and in international forums,
as appropriate, on issues concerning trade in forest products and the conservation and
sustainable management of forests.

Article 17.20: Cooperation

1. The Parties recognise that cooperation is an effective means to meet the
objectives, implement the obligations, and enhance the benefits, of this Section, and to
strengthen each Party’s capacity to protect the environment and contribute to the
achievement of sustainable development.

2. Taking account of their respective national priorities and circumstances, and
available resources, the Parties shall cooperate to address matters of mutual interest in
relation to the implementation of this Section. Each Party should foster inclusive
engagement with interested stakeholders in the development and implementation of
activities under this Article.

3. The Parties shall seek to complement the cooperation under this Section through
cooperation at international and regional forums and through existing mechanisms
between the Parties.

4. The Parties may cooperate through Chapter 19 (Economic and Technical
Cooperation), as well as through other means, such as collaborative programs and
projects, dialogues, workshops, seminars, conferences, technical assistance, sharing of
information and best practices, joint analysis and exchange of experts, and any other
forms of cooperation.

5. Areas of cooperation may include:

(a) addressing climate change, including energy security and transition to
clean energy, pollution reduction, including plastic pollution, and
preventing loss of biodiversity, including conservation, protection, and
sustainable use;

(b) sustainable agriculture and food security, including agricultural
productivity, adaptation, and resilience to climate change;

(c) sustainable management of vegetable oil production, including on
standards, guidelines, and best practices;

17-12

(d) promote sustainable forest management, including initiatives to combat
illegal logging and associated trade;

(e) sustainable marine fisheries and aquaculture, including efforts to combat
IUU fishing and promote trade in I[UU-free fish and seafood products;

(f) development and use of voluntary mechanisms that promote products
aimed at protecting the environment and that contribute to sustainable
development; and

(g) and any other areas of cooperation as decided by the Parties.

Article 17.21: Contact Points and Environment Sub-Committee

1. Each Party shall, upon entry into force of this Agreement, designate and maintain
an environment contact point to facilitate communication between Parties in the
implementation of this Section, and shall notify the other Party of its environment contact
point.

2. The Parties hereby establish an Environment Sub-Committee composed of senior
governmental representatives of each Party. The purpose of the Environment Sub-
Committee is to oversee the implementation of this Section, and its functions are to:

(a) provide a forum to discuss and review the implementation;
(b) identify priority areas for cooperative activities;

(c) provide updates and reports of its activities to the Trade and Sustainable
Development Committee established under Article 17.47 (Committee on
Trade and Sustainable Development and Contact Points);

(d) consider and endeavour to resolve matters referred to it under
Article 17.22 (Environment Consultations);

(e) coordinate with other Committees established under this Agreement, as
appropriate; and

(f) perform any other functions as decided by the Parties.

3. The Environment Sub-Committee shall meet for the first time no later than one
year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and subsequently as decided by
the Parties.

4. The Environment Sub-Committee shall make its summary records, decisions,
reports, and recommendations available to the public, unless the Sub-Committee decides
otherwise.

Article 17.22: Environment Consultations

1. The Parties shall endeavour to agree on the interpretation and application of this
Chapter, and shall make every effort, including through dialogue, consultation, exchange
of information, and cooperation, to resolve any matter that might affect the operation of
this Chapter.

17-13

2. If a matter remains unresolved, a Party (the requesting Party) may request
consultations with the other Party (the responding Party) by delivering a written request
for consultations to the responding Party’s environment contact point. The requesting
Party shall include in its request information that is specific and sufficient to enable the
responding Party to respond.

3. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, the Parties shall enter into consultations
promptly and no later than 30 days after the date of receipt by the responding Party of the
request. Consultations shall take place through the Environment Sub-Committee and the
Parties shall make every effort to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution.

4. If the Parties fail to resolve the matter pursuant to paragraph 3, the requesting
Party may refer the matter to the Joint Committee established under Article 23.1
(Administrative and Institutional Provisions — Establishment of the Joint Committee) by
delivering a written request for consultations to the responding Party’s environment
contact point. Consultations shall start no later than 60 days after the date of receipt by
the responding Party of the request made under this paragraph. The Joint Committee
shall, within 120 days after the date of the start of the consultations, issue a decision and
recommendations on the course of action to resolve the matter, as appropriate.

5. Consultations held under this Article shall be confidential and without prejudice
to the rights of a Party in any future proceedings.°

Article 17.23: Dispute Resolution

1. For the purposes of this Section, Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) only applies to
matters arising under Article 17.8 (Enforcement of Environmental Laws).

2. In a matter arising under Article 17.8 (Enforcement of Environmental Laws), if
the Parties fail to resolve the matter following a decision of the Joint Committee pursuant
to Article 17.22.4 (Environment Consultations), the requesting Party may request the
establishment of a panel under Article 24.7 (Dispute Settlement — Request for the
Establishment of a Panel).

3. Before a Party initiates dispute settlement under Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement)
for a matter arising under Article 17.8 (Enforcement of Environmental Laws), that Party
shall consider whether it maintains environmental laws that are substantially equivalent
in scope to the environmental laws that would be the subject of the dispute.

4. If a Party requests consultations with the other Party under Article 17.22
(Environment Consultations) for a matter arising under Article 17.8 (Enforcement of
Environmental Laws), and the responding Party considers that the requesting Party does
not maintain environmental laws that are substantially equivalent in scope to the
environmental laws that would be the subject of the dispute, the Parties shall discuss the
issue during the consultations.

6 For greater certainty, recourse to consultations shall not be construed as a recognition by either Party of a violation of
an obligation under Article 17.8 (Enforcement of Environmental Laws).

17-14

Section C: Trade and Labour

Sub-Section C-1: Shared Commitments

Article 17.24: General Commitments

1. The Parties affirm their obligations as members of the ILO, including those stated
in the ILO Declaration on Rights at Work, such as to respect, promote, and realise in
good faith the fundamental rights that are the subject of fundamental ILO Conventions;
and those that are enshrined in the ILO Declaration on Social Justice’, to further the aims
of the Decent Work Agenda with due regard to the national condition and circumstances
of each Party.

2. The Parties recognise the important role of workers’ and employers’ organisations
with respect to labour rights.

Sub-Section C-2: Obligations®

Article 17.25: General Obligations

1. Each Party shall adopt and maintain in its laws and regulations the following
rights as stated in the ILO Declaration on Rights at Work:

(a) freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to
collective bargaining;

(b) the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour;
(c) the effective abolition of child labour;

(d) the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and
occupation; and

(e) a safe and healthy working environment.

2. Each Party shall adopt and maintain laws and regulations governing acceptable
conditions of work with respect to minimum wages and hours of work.’

3. Each Party shall effectively implement in its labour laws the fundamental ILO
Conventions that it has ratified, and shall endeavour to ratify the other fundamental ILO
Conventions if they have not yet done so.

’ The Parties recall that the ILO Declaration on Social Justice recognises that the violation of fundamental principles
and rights at work cannot be invoked or otherwise used as a legitimate comparative advantage and that labour standards
should not be used for protectionist trade purposes.

8 To establish a violation of an obligation under this Sub-Section, a Party must demonstrate that the other Party has
failed to meet its obligation in a manner affecting trade or investment.

° For greater certainty, this obligation relates to the establishment by a Party in its laws and regulations of acceptable
conditions of work as determined by that Party.

17-15

Article 17.26: Right to Regulate and Levels of Protection

1. The Parties recognise that each Party has the right to set its labour priorities,
establish its levels of labour protection, and to adopt or modify its laws and policies
accordingly in a manner consistent with its international labour commitments, including
those in this Section.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that its labour laws provide for high labour
standards and shall endeavour to continue to improve those standards.

Article 17.27: Non-Derogation

The Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage trade or investment by
weakening or reducing the protections afforded in each Party’s labour laws. Accordingly,
a Party shall not waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or otherwise
derogate from, its labour laws, if the waiver or derogation would be inconsistent with a
right set out in Article 17.25.1 or Article 17.25.2 (General Obligations) in a manner
affecting trade or investment between the Parties.

Article 17.28: Enforcement of Labour Laws

1. A Party shall not fail to effectively enforce its labour laws through a sustained or
recurring course of action or inaction'® in a manner affecting trade or investment.

2. If a Party fails to comply with an obligation under this Section, a decision made
by that Party on the provision of enforcement resources shall not excuse that failure. Each
Party retains the right to exercise reasonable enforcement discretion and to make bona
fide decisions with regard to the allocation of enforcement resources between labour
enforcement activities among the fundamental labour rights and acceptable conditions of
work enumerated in Article 17.25.1 and Article 17.25.2 (General Obligations), provided
that the exercise of that discretion, and those decisions, are not inconsistent with its
obligations under this Section.

3. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to empower a Party’s authorities to
undertake labour laws enforcement activities in the territory of the other Party.

Article 17.29: Forced or Compulsory Labour

The Parties recognise their goal of eliminating all forms of forced or compulsory
labour, including forced or compulsory child labour, and may undertake cooperative
activities pursuant to Article 17.36 (Cooperation) to support that goal.

'0 For greater certainty, a “sustained or recurring course of action or inaction” is “sustained” if the course of action or
inaction is consistent or ongoing, and is “recurring” if the course of action or inaction occurs periodically or repeatedly
and when the occurrences are related or the same in nature. A course of action or inaction does not include an isolated
instance or case.

17-16

Article 17.30: Violence Against Workers

1. The Parties recognise that workers and workers’ organisations must be able to
exercise the rights set out in Article 17.25 (General Obligations) in a climate that is free
from violence, threats, and intimidation, and that governments shall address incidents of
this behaviour against workers.

2. The Parties may undertake cooperative activities through Article 17.36
(Cooperation) to support the objective of paragraph 1.

Article 17.31: Public Awareness and Procedural Guarantees
1. Each Party shall promote public awareness of its labour laws, including by
ensuring that information related to its labour laws and enforcement and compliance

procedures is publicly available.

2. Each Party shall ensure that a person with a recognised interest under its law in a
particular matter has appropriate access to administrative, quasi-judicial, or judicial
proceedings for the enforcement of the Party’s labour laws, including access to remedies
for a violation of those laws.

3. Each Party shall provide in its laws and regulations that proceedings before
administrative, quasi-judicial, or judicial bodies for the enforcement of its labour laws:

(a) are fair, equitable, and transparent;
(b) comply with due process of law;

(c) do not entail unreasonable fees or time limits, and are not subject to
unwarranted delay; and

(d) are open to the public, unless the law or the administration of justice
requires otherwise.

4. Each Party affirms the principles of impartiality and independence in the
administration of justice in the enforcement of its labour law.

5. Each Party shall provide that:

(a) the parties to these proceedings are entitled to support or defend their
respective positions, including by presenting information or evidence; and

(b) final decisions on the merits of the case:

(1) are based on information or evidence in respect of which the
parties were offered the opportunity to be heard;

(11) state the reasons on which they are based; and
(ii1) are available in writing without undue delay to the parties to the

proceedings and to the public unless the law or the administration
of justice requires otherwise.

17-17

6. Each Party shall provide that parties to these proceedings have the right, under its
law, to seek review of the decisions and, if warranted, the correction of decisions issued
in these proceedings, in accordance with due process.

Sub-Section C-3: Institutional Mechanisms

Article 17.32: Labour Council

1. The Parties hereby establish a Labour Council (“Council”) composed of senior
governmental representatives at the ministerial or other level from the ministries
responsible for labour issues, as designated by each Party.

2. The Council shall meet as often as it considers necessary to discuss matters of
common interest, and to oversee the implementation of, and review progress under, this
Section. If practicable, each meeting of the Council shall include a public session or other
means for Council members to meet with the relevant stakeholders to discuss matters
relating to the implementation of this Section.

3. In conducting its activities, including meetings, the Council shall endeavour to
provide a means for receiving and considering the views of an interested person on
matters related to this Section.

4. The Council may consider any matter within the scope of this Section and take
any action in the exercise of its functions.

5. The Council shall review the operation and effectiveness of this Section within
five years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement and thereafter as may be
decided by the Council.

Article 17.33: Contact Points

1. Each Party shall designate a labour contact point for this Section within its
ministry responsible for labour issues, or an equivalent entity, to address matters related
to this Section.

2. Each Party shall notify the other Party promptly in the event of any change to its
labour contact point.

3. The labour contact point of each Party shall serve as a point of contact with the
other Party to:

(a) facilitate regular communication and coordination between the Parties,
including responding to requests for information and providing sufficient
information to enable a full examination of matters related to this Section;

(b) assist the Council;

(c) report to the Council, as appropriate;

(d) receive and independently review public submissions in accordance with
Article 17.35 (Public Submissions);

17-18

(e) act as a channel for communication with the public in their respective
territories; and

(f) work together, including with other appropriate agencies of their
governments, to develop and implement cooperative activities, guided by
the priorities of the Council, areas of cooperation identified in
Article 17.36 (Cooperation), and the needs of the Parties.

4. The labour contact point of a Party may develop and implement specific
cooperative activities with the labour contact point of the other Party.

5. The labour contact points of the Parties may communicate and coordinate
activities in person or through electronic or other means of communication.

Article 17.34: Public Engagement

Each Party shall establish or maintain a national labour consultative or advisory
body or similar mechanism, for members of its public, including representatives of its
workers’ and employers’ organisations, to consult with and provide views to the Party on
matters regarding this Section.

Article 17.35: Public Submissions

1. Each Party, through its labour contact point designated under Article 17.33
(Contact Points), shall provide for the receipt and consideration of written submissions
from a person of that Party on matters related to this Section in accordance with its
domestic procedures. Each Party shall make publicly available its procedures, including
timelines, for the receipt and consideration of written submissions.

2. Each Party shall:

(a) consider matters raised by the submission and provide a timely response to
the submitter, including in writing, as appropriate; and

(b) make the submission and the results of its consideration available to the
other Party and the public, if appropriate, in a timely manner.

3. A Party may request from the person or organisation that made the submission
additional information that is necessary to consider the substance of the submission.

Article 17.36: Cooperation

1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperating on any matter related to this
Section.
2. The Parties may cooperate through activities such as the exchange of information,

seminars, workshops, conferences, or any other activity as the Parties may decide.

17-19

3. Areas of cooperation may include the ILO fundamental principles and rights and
their effective implementation, labour administration, labour inspectorates, and
inspection systems, or any other areas as the Parties may decide.

4. In undertaking cooperative activities, the Parties shall consider each Party’s
priorities, and the availability of resources.

5. Notwithstanding Article 19.5 (Economic and Technical Cooperation — Relation to
Other Chapters), cooperation activities under this Article shall only be subject to

Chapter 19 (Economic and Technical Cooperation) if the contact points of each Party so
decide. As appropriate, the contact points may coordinate with the Committee on
Economic and Technical Cooperation, including on matters related to implementing
cooperative activities under this Article that are subject to Chapter 19 (Economic and
Technical Cooperation).

6. The Parties may establish cooperative arrangements with the ILO and other
competent international and regional organisations.

Article 17.37: Labour Consultations

1. The Parties shall endeavour to come to an understanding on the interpretation and
application of this Section.

2. A Party may request consultations (requesting Party) with the other Party
regarding any matter under this Section by delivering a written request to the labour
contact point of the other Party. The Parties shall make every attempt, including through
cooperation, consultations, and the exchange of information, to address a matter that
might affect the operation of this Section.

3. Labour consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of a
Party in any other proceedings. The Parties may decide to make the fact, timelines, and
general subject-matter of the consultations publicly available.

Article 17.38: Joint Committee Consultations

1. If the Parties fail to resolve the matter within 90 days from the date of the receipt
of the request for consultation pursuant to Article 17.37.2 (Labour Consultations), a Party
may request that the Joint Committee established under Article 23.1 (Administrative and
Institutional Provisions - Establishment of the Joint Committee) convene to consider the
matter at issue by delivering a written request to the Agreement Coordinator of the other
Party designated under Article 23.5 (Administrative and Institutional Provisions -
Agreement Coordinators), with a copy to the labour contact point of each Party. The Joint
Committee shall convene no later than 60 days after the receipt of the request, unless the
Parties decide otherwise, to seek to resolve the matter. In seeking to resolve the matter,
the Joint Committee may, if appropriate, consult independent experts and have recourse
to procedures such as good offices, conciliation, or mediation. The Joint Committee
consultations shall include senior governmental representatives at the ministerial or other
level from the ministries responsible for trade and labour issues, as designated by each
Party.

17-20

2. If the Joint Committee is able to resolve the matter, it shall document any
outcome including, if appropriate, specific steps and timelines that are decided by the
Joint Committee. If the Parties agree, the Parties shall make the outcome available to the
public.

3. If the Joint Committee fails to resolve the matter within 75 days of its first
meeting to seek to resolve the matter, the requesting Party may request the establishment
of a panel under Article 24.7 (Dispute Settlement — Request for the Establishment of a
Panel), as provided in Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement).

4. A Party shall not have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 24 (Dispute
Settlement) for a matter arising under this Section without first seeking to resolve the
matter in accordance with Article 17.37 (Labour Consultations) and this Article.

5. Joint Committee consultations on a matter under this Section shall be confidential
and without prejudice to the rights of a Party in any other proceeding.'! The Parties may
decide to make the fact, timelines, and general subject matter of the consultations
publicly available.

Section D: Trade and Women’s Economic Empowerment

Article 17.39: General Understandings

1. The Parties affirm the importance of incorporating a women’s economic
empowerment perspective into the development of their respective policies and practices
that promote equality between women and men, particularly in relation to participation in
national and international economies and to contribute to sustainable economic
development. Accordingly, the Parties commit to enhance their collaboration in building
and strengthening the capacity of the Parties in this area.

2. The Parties recognise the importance of strengthening their trade relations and
cooperation in ways that effectively provide equal rights, opportunities, and treatment for
women to benefit from this Agreement.

3. The Parties recognise the right of each Party to set its equality priorities and to
adopt or modify, and to enforce its laws, regulations, policies and practices in order to
advance the empowerment of women in a manner consistent with this Agreement and
with the international agreements to which each Party is a party, while taking into
consideration their respective economic development capacities.

4. The Parties affirm that it is inappropriate to weaken or reduce women’s rights in
their respective laws and regulations in order to encourage trade or investment.

5. The Parties recognise that women are entitled to economic rights, and affirm that
it is important to take appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in
areas of economic life.

"| For greater certainty, recourse to consultations under Article 17.37 (Labour Consultations) and Article 17.38 (Joint
Committee Consultations) shall not be construed as a recognition by either Party of the establishment of a violation of
an obligation under Sub-Section C-2 — Obligations.

17-21

Article 17.40: International Instruments

Each Party affirms its obligations under any international agreements to which it
is a party, including the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women, done at New York on 18 December 1979, or commitments under
relevant international instruments that promote and enhance women’s economic
empowerment. Relevant instruments include:

(a) United Nations General Assembly Resolution A/RES/70/1“Transforming
Our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development” adopted on
25 September 2015, and specifically Goal 5;

(b) The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, adopted at Beijing by
the Fourth World Conference on Women on 15 September 1995;

(c) Joint Ministerial Declaration on Trade and Women’s Economic
Empowerment endorsed on the margins of the Eleventh WTO Ministerial
Conference (MC11) held in Buenos Aires, December 2017.

Article 17.41: Public Awareness

Each Party shall domestically promote public knowledge of its laws, regulations,
and policies that protect the rights of women and promote equality between men and
women, including by making them publicly available online.

Article 17.42: Transparency and Information Sharing

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain a publicly accessible website containing
information regarding this Agreement, including a summary of this Agreement and a list
of key provisions relevant to women’s economic empowerment.

2. Each Party may include on its website links to:
(a) the equivalent website of the other Party;

(b) the action plan established under Article 17.44.2(a) (Sub-Committee on
Trade and Women’s Economic Empowerment);

(c) reports of activities implemented under the action plan established under
Article 17.44.2(a) (Sub-Committee on Trade and Women’s Economic
Empowerment) by the Sub-Committee; and

(d) the websites of its own government agencies and other appropriate entities

that provide information the Party considers useful to women interested in
trading, investing, or doing business in that Party’s territory.

17-22

Article 17.43: Cooperation Activities

1. The Parties acknowledge the benefit of sharing their respective experiences and
practices in designing, implementing, monitoring, evaluating, and strengthening policies
and programs to encourage women’s participation in national and international
economies.

2. The Parties shall carry out cooperation activities designed to improve the capacity
and conditions for women workers, women-owned enterprises, and women entrepreneurs
to access and fully benefit from the opportunities created by this Agreement as mutually
agreed by both Parties.

3. Cooperation activities shall be carried out on issues and topics decided by the
Parties reflecting the priority interest of each Party.

4. The Parties recognise the importance of the principles of equality, empowerment,
inclusivity, accountability, and transparency in carrying out cooperation activities under
this Chapter.

5. Areas of cooperation may include:

(a) developing programs to promote women’s full participation and
advancement in the economy and society by encouraging capacity-
building and skills enhancement of women at work, in business, and at
senior levels in all sectors of society, including on corporate boards;

(b) improving women’s access to, and participation and leadership in, science,
technology, and innovation, including education in science, technology,
engineering, mathematics, and business;

(c) promoting financial inclusion, education, and training for women as well
as promoting access to financial assistance and financing, including export
financing and venture capital, for women to start-up and scale-up their
businesses and go global;

(d) promoting business development services for women and programs to
improve women's digital skills and access to online business tools;

(e) advancing women’s leadership and developing women’s networks;

(f) developing better practices to promote equality between women and men
within public and private institutions and enterprises;

(g) fostering women’s representation in decision-making positions in the
public, private, and not-for-profit sectors;

(h) promoting women’s entrepreneurship;
(1) enhancing women’s participation in government procurement markets;

(}) developing trade missions for businesswomen and women entrepreneurs;

17-23

(k)

promoting labour practices that facilitate the integration, retention, and
progression of women in the job market, and which seek to build the
capacity and skills of women workers, and improve access to productive
employment and decent work and ensure non-discrimination in the
workplace;

(1) promoting women’s participation in standards development and sharing
best practices on how to take into account biological and cultural
differences in standards development and implementation in order to make
progress on standards that will facilitate and ensure women’s equal
participation in the economy and trade;

(m) conducting an impact assessment, including of policies and programs to
support women’s entrepreneurship, and sharing best practices;

(n) sharing methods and procedures for the collection of sex-disaggregated
data, the use of indicators, and the analysis of statistics related to trade and
women’s participation in the workforce;

(0) sharing information and best practices on policies and programs that aim
to close the digital divide between women and men, and advance the use
of e-commerce as a tool to support women’s economic empowerment;

(p) sharing information and best practices on policies and programs that aim
to close the wage gap between women and men, such as pay equity and
pay transparency legislation;

(q) sharing information on establishing and promoting women-led
cooperatives and facilitating their access to international networks,
markets, and supply chains; and

(r) any other issues as decided by the Parties.

6. The Parties, subject to priorities to be decided based on their interests and
available resources, may carry out activities in the cooperation areas set out in
paragraph 5 through:

(a) workshops, seminars, dialogues, and other forums for exchanging
knowledge, experiences, and best practices;

(b) internships, visits, and research studies to document and study policies and
practices;

(c) collaborative research and development of best practices in subject matters
of mutual interest;

(d) specific exchanges of specialised technical knowledge and technical
assistance, and sex-disaggregated data, as appropriate; and

(e) other means as decided by the Parties.

17-24

7. The Parties acknowledge the importance of initiatives, efforts, and work on trade
and women’s economic empowerment in relevant international forums, and the
importance of taking into consideration their findings, recommendations, and activities to
ensure effective coordination and implementation of cooperation activities. Accordingly,
the Parties shall work together in relevant international forums including where possible
at the WTO, to advance trade and women’s economic empowerment issues, knowledge,
and awareness, without prejudice to each Party’s priorities, policies and positions in those
forums.

Article 17.44: Sub-Committee on Trade and Women’s Economic Empowerment

1. The Parties hereby establish a Trade and Women’s Economic Empowerment
Sub-Committee (“WEE Sub-Committee”) composed of representatives from each Party.

2. The WEE Sub-Committee shall:

(a) establish an action plan of priority cooperation activities to be
implemented and take steps to carry them out;

(b) make recommendations, as appropriate, to the Trade and Sustainable
Development Committee as established under Article 17.47 (Committee
on Trade and Sustainable Development and Contact Points), on the
implementation, operation, interpretation, and any other matter related to
this Section and across this Agreement with respect to the economic
empowerment of women;

(c) exchange information on the Parties’ experiences and lessons learned
through the cooperation activities carried out under Article 17.43
(Cooperation Activities);

(d) discuss joint proposals to support policies and other initiatives on trade
and women’s economic empowerment;

(e) invite international institutions, private sector entities, non-governmental
organisations, or other relevant institutions, as appropriate, to assist with
the development and implementation of cooperation activities;

(f) encourage multilateral and regional organisations to finance projects that
enable women’s economic empowerment and women’s ability to
trade; and

(g) carry out other duties as decided by the Parties.

3. The WEE Sub-Committee shall meet as decided by the Parties in person or by any
other technological means available, to consider any matter arising under this Section.

4. In the performance of its duties, the WEE Sub-Committee may work with any
other body established under this Agreement. In the context of this work, the WEE
Sub-Committee shall encourage efforts by these bodies to integrate women’s economic
empowerment considerations, activities, and commitments into their work.

17-25

5. The WEE Sub-Committee shall periodically review the cooperation activities
carried out under Article 17.43 (Cooperation Activities) that promote women’s economic
empowerment, as well as each Party’s implementation of this Section. The WEE
Sub-Committee shall report and make recommendations to the Trade and Sustainable
Development Committee established under Article 17.47 (Committee on Trade and
Sustainable Development and Contact Points) on this review and other matters as
necessary.

Article 17.45: Contact Points

The Parties shall designate a WEE contact point from its relevant authorities
within 90 days of entry into force of this Agreement, in order to facilitate communication
between the Parties on any matter relating to this Section. Each Party shall notify the
other Party of the contact details of its WEE contact point and shall promptly notify any
change to its WEE contact point or contact details.

Article 17.46: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

1. Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) does not apply to any matter arising under this
Section.
2. The Parties shall make all possible efforts, through dialogue, consultations, and

cooperation, to resolve any matter arising under this Section.

Section E: Institutional Provisions

Article 17.47: Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development and Contact
Points

1. Recognising the need to coordinate the work of the Environment Sub-Committee
established under Article 17.21 (Contact Points and Environment Sub-Committee), the
Labour Council established under Article 17.32 (Labour Council), and the WEE
Sub-Committee established under Article 17.44 (Sub-Committee on Trade and Women’s
Economic Empowerment), (“Sub-Committees’’), the Parties hereby establish a
Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development (“TSD Committee’’).

2. The TSD Committee shall be composed of senior governmental representatives as
designated by each Party, and co-chaired by the Parties.

3. The TSD Committee shall meet as often as it considers necessary including, if
appropriate, in advance of or in conjunction with meetings of the Joint Committee
established under Article 23.1 (Administrative and Institutional Provisions —
Establishment of the Joint Committee) to discuss matters of common interest under this
Chapter, including horizontal issues concerning the environment, labour, and women’s
economic empowerment. Meetings shall be hosted alternately by Canada and Indonesia.
Officials for each Party that are responsible for matters concerning the environment,
labour, and women’s economic empowerment shall participate in meetings of the TSD
Committee.

17-26

4. The functions of the TSD Committee shall be to:

(a) act as a liaison, facilitate regular communication, and coordinate
information sharing between the Sub-Committees;

(b) report to the Joint Committee, as appropriate;

(c) schedule and organise TSD Committee meetings, and if appropriate,
dedicated sessions on matters covered under the Sub-Committees;

(d) receive updates and reports of the activities undertaken by the
Sub-Committees;

(e) coordinate recommendations to the Joint Committee based on the advice
provided by the Sub-Committees;

(f) discuss and provide advice, if appropriate, to the Parties on ways to promote
trade and investment that contribute to enhancing decent work, high levels
of environmental protection, and inclusive economic growth;

(g) if appropriate, assess the impact on trade and investment between the
Parties of certain measures taken by a Party to implement this Chapter; and

(h) — perform any other functions as the Parties may decide.

5. The TSD Committee shall make its joint summary records, decisions, reports, and
recommendations available to the public, unless the TSD Committee decides otherwise.

6. In addition to the contact points established by each Party under Article 17.21
(Contact Points and Environment Sub-Committee), Article 17.33 (Contact Points), and
Article 17.45 (Contact Points), each Party shall, within one month after the date of entry
into force of this Agreement, designate a TSD contact point to facilitate communication
and coordination between the Parties on any matter relating to this Chapter. Each Party
shall notify the other Party of the contact details of its TSD contact point. A Party shall
also promptly notify the other Party of any change of contact details for its TSD contact
point.

Article 17.48: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) does not apply to any matter arising under this
Section.

17-27

CHAPTER 18

TRADE AND SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED ENTERPRISES

Article 18.1: General Provisions

1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of promoting an environment that
facilitates and support the development, growth, and competitiveness of Small and
Medium Enterprises (“SMEs”) including social entrepreneurs and SMEs organised as
cooperatives. The Parties also recognise the participation of SMEs in domestic markets as
well as in international trade and investment and their contribution in achieving inclusive
economic growth, sustainable development, and enhanced productivity.

2. The Parties shall develop and promote cooperation on SMEs, with the purpose of
contributing to the expansion, diversification, and deepening of economic and
commercial ties between the Parties, in recognition of the fundamental role of SMEs in
creating and maintaining dynamism, and enhancing competitiveness of the economies of
the Parties.

3. The Parties also recognise the importance of providing SMEs with information on
tariff and non-tariff measures to facilitate international trade and investment.

4. The Parties acknowledge that improving the ability of SMEs to participate in
trade and investment will enhance their competitiveness.

5. The Parties recognise the importance of innovation for SMEs’ competitiveness
and the importance of enhanced access to information, financing, digitalisation, transfer
of technology on agreed terms, and networking in facilitating the innovation process.

6. The Parties also acknowledge that SMEs owned or operated by women,
Indigenous Peoples!, persons with disabilities, youth, and other under-represented
groups” may require additional or targeted support to enhance their growth,
competitiveness and access to international trade and investment.

7. Each Party may encourage SMEs operating within its territory or subject to its
jurisdiction to observe internationally recognised voluntary standards, guidelines, and
principles of responsible business conduct and corporate social responsibility practices,
as appropriate.

8. The Parties recognise the importance of considering current research and
initiatives on SMEs developed under the WTO, the International Trade Centre , the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the International Labour
organisation, the Group of Twenty (G20), the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC), the organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), and
other relevant forums, and the importance of taking into account their findings and
recommendations to improve the ability of SMEs to participate in and benefit from trade,
as appropriate.

' For the purposes of this Chapter, “Indigenous Peoples” refers to:

(a) for Canada, Aboriginal peoples (including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples) as defined in
subsection 35(2) of the Constitution Act, 1982 of Canada;
(b) for Indonesia, Masyarakat Hukum Adat in accordance with Indonesia’s laws and regulations.

> For the purposes of this Chapter, the scope of "other under-represented group" is as defined by each Party.

18-]

9. The Parties acknowledge the provisions of various Chapters in this Agreement
that contribute to encouraging and facilitating, and further enhancing the participation of
SMEs in trade and investment opportunities derived from this Agreement.

Article 18.2: Information Sharing

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain a publicly accessible webpage containing
information regarding this Agreement, including:

(a) the text of this Agreement;

(b) a summary of this Agreement; and

(c) information designed for SMEs that contains:

(1) a description of the provisions in this Agreement that the Party
considers to be relevant to SMEs; and
(11) any additional information that the Party considers useful for
SMEs interested in benefitting from the opportunities provided by
this Agreement.
2. Each Party may include on its webpage links to:

(a) the equivalent webpage of the other Party; and

(b) the webpage of its government agencies and other appropriate entities that
provide information the Party considers useful to any person interested in
trading, investing, or doing business in that Party’s territory.

3. The information described in paragraph 2(b) may include the following and be
customised according to each Party’s capacities, and the interests of their SMEs:

(a) tariff and non-tariff measures;

(b) custom regulations and procedures;

(c) regulations and procedures concerning intellectual property rights;

(d) information and programs to help SMEs become more cyber-secure,
aware, and ready, including cybersecurity and privacy regulations,
standards, cybersecurity controls, and conformity assessment measures
relating to the cybersecurity posture of the SME;

(e) technical regulations, standards, conformity assessment procedures,
sanitary and phytosanitary measures relating to importation and
exportation, and related enquiry points;

(f) foreign investment regulations;

(g) registration and governance procedures of business, including SMEs
organised as cooperatives;

(h) trade promotion programs;

18-2

(1) start-up promotion programs;
(j) competitiveness programs;

(k) SME financing programs, including export financing, insurance services,
and venture capital;

(1) employment regulations, including pay equity and pay transparency
regulations;

(m) taxation information, if possible;
(n) information related to the temporary entry of business persons;
(0) government procurement opportunities; and

(p) statistics of economic relevance and other macro data of interest about
SMEs.

4. Each Party shall ensure that their respective webpages referred to in this Article
are accessible to the public within a reasonable amount of time after this Agreement
enters into force.

5. Each Party shall regularly review the information and links on the webpage
referred to in this Article to ensure the information and links are up-to-date and accurate.

6. Each Party shall ensure that the information set out in this article is presented in a
manner that is accessible for SMEs.

7. Each Party shall ensure that the information on the webpage is available in its
own official language(s), as appropriate.

Article 18.3: Cooperation activities on SMEs

1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation activities between the Parties
to support the objectives of this Chapter.

2. The Parties also recognise the importance of involving the private sector in the
development and implementation of cooperation activities, as appropriate.

3. The Parties shall collaborate to provide information on tariff and non-tariff
measures in international trade for SMEs, support productive sectors in which SMEs
operate, and promote the growth and creation of higher paying, more productive jobs by
SMEs.

4. The Parties shall consider the participation of women, Indigenous Peoples youth,
persons with disabilities and other under-represented groups in the identification and
implementation of cooperation activities.

5. Cooperation activities may include:

(a) facilitating the exchange of best practices concerning public policies and
programs, as well as relevant information to support and assist SMEs in
adapting to changing market conditions, such as market research and the
collection and analysis of sex disaggregated data;

18-3

(b)

(Cc)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(1)

(m)

(n)

promoting SMEs’ participation in international trade, as well as business
growth, and enhancing their integration into global value chains;

promoting a favourable environment for the development of SMEs by
encouraging relevant private and governmental agencies to support the
capacity-building of SMEs;

exchanging experiences on developing entrepreneurial capacity and
culture, and on fostering entrepreneurs;

strengthening the Parties’ collaboration on activities to promote the
participation of SMEs including those owned or operated by the groups
identified in paragraph 4, and promoting partnerships and networks for
these SMEs and their participation in international trade and investment;

exchanging information and best practices on improving SMEs’ access to
capital and credit, including government financing instruments;

exchanging information on funding programs, innovative funding
mechanisms, training and capacity building activities, or any other
mechanism for SMEs that may increase trade and investment
opportunities;

exploring opportunities to facilitate each Party’s work in developing and
enhancing SME export counselling, assistance and training programs;

encouraging investment in the SMEs of each Party to promote their
development and access to international trade and investment;

encouraging SMEs’ participation in platforms, such as web-based
platforms, for business entrepreneurs and counsellors to share information
and best practices to help SMEs link with international suppliers, buyers,
and other potential business partners;

supporting SMEs’ digital-related skill development to enhance their
participation in electronic commerce and digital trade in order to take
advantage of the opportunities resulting from this Agreement and rapidly
access new markets;

promoting the organisation of trade promotion networks and business
forums, and the joint implementation of seminars, conferences,
symposiums, business roundtables, or other related activities to explore
business, industrial, and technical opportunities, and to inform SMEs of
the benefits available to them under this Agreement;

exchanging information on the development and implementation of
incubators, accelerators, and SME support centers;

facilitating the exchange of information on entrepreneurship education

programs for the groups identified in paragraph 4 to promote the
entrepreneurial environment in the territories of each Party;

18-4

(0)

(p)

(q)

(r)

improving SMEs’ access to participation in leadership, entrepreneurship,
science, technology, and innovation-related business and trade, including
education in science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and business,
particularly SMEs owned or operated by women;

sharing best practices and information on establishing and promoting
SMEs, including those organised as cooperatives, and increasing their
access to international networks, markets and supply chains;

exchanging information and best practices on SME-related cybersecurity
programs, cybersecurity and privacy regulations, standards, controls, and
conformity assessment measures to improve SMEs’ cybersecurity
posture; and

facilitating the development of tools to increase the ability of SMEs to
fully participate in and benefit from the opportunities created by this
Agreement, and assist them in integrating into the global supply chain.

6. The Parties may collaborate within existing international forums to promote and
advance the interests of SMEs and their participation in international trade and
investment, including at the WTO, OECD, G20, and APEC.

Article 18.4: Committee on SMEs

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on SMEs (““Committee’’), composed of
representatives from each Party.

2. The Committee shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

identify ways to assist SMEs of each Party, such as cooperatives, to take
advantage of the commercial opportunities resulting from this Agreement,
including those owned or operated by women, Indigenous Peoples, youth,
persons with disabilities, and under-represented groups, and to strengthen
SMEs’ competitiveness;

exchange and discuss experiences and best practices in supporting and
assisting SME exporters with respect to, among other things, training
programs, trade education, trade finance, trade missions, trade facilitation,
electronic commerce and digital trade, cooperative business practices,
identifying commercial partners in the other Party, and establishing good
business credentials;

recommend additional information that a Party may include on the
webpage referred to in Article 18.2 (Information Sharing);

18-5

(d) review and coordinate the Committee’s work program with the work of
other committees, subcommittees, working groups, contact points, and any
other subsidiary body established under this Agreement, to avoid
duplication of work programs and to identify appropriate opportunities for
cooperation to improve the ability of SMEs to engage in trade and
investment opportunities resulting from this Agreement;

(e) collaborate with and encourage committees, subcommittees, working
groups, contact points and any other subsidiary bodies established under
this Agreement to consider integrating SME-related commitments and
activities into their work;

(f) review the implementation and operation of this Chapter and SME-related
provisions within the Agreement and report findings and make
recommendations to the Joint Committee that can be included in future
work and SME assistance programs as appropriate;

(g) report on its activities or make appropriate recommendations to the Joint
Committee, as appropriate, when the Joint Committee meets under
Article 23.3 (Administrative and Institutional Provisions — Meetings of the
Joint Committee);

(h) discuss current issues relating to SMEs;

(1) consider any other matter pertaining to SMEs as the Committee may
decide, including issues raised by SMEs regarding their ability to benefit
from this Agreement; and

(j) carry out its activities, with the inclusive participation of women.

3. The Committee shall convene in person or by any technological means available
within one year after the Agreement enters into force, and thereafter meet annually,
unless the Parties decide otherwise.

4. The Committee may seek to collaborate with appropriate experts, international

donor organisations, and SMEs, including workers, business advocacy representatives,
and associations, in developing and carrying out its programs and activities.

Article 18.5: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

1. Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) does not apply to any matter arising under this
Chapter.
2. The Parties shall make all possible efforts, through dialogue, consultations, and

cooperation, to resolve any matter arising under this Chapter.

18-6

CHAPTER 19

ECONOMIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION

Article 19.1: Objectives

1. To support the objectives of this Agreement to increase trade and investment
between Canada and Indonesia, the Parties agree to promote economic and technical
cooperation to:

(a) strengthen the capacity of the Parties and, as appropriate, the private sector
to support the implementation and maximise the opportunities and
benefits of this Agreement;

(b) facilitate the implementation of economic and technical cooperation
activities related to trade and investment commitments under this
Agreement and any further mutually agreed cooperation activities that
contribute to the objectives of this Agreement; and

(c) promote inclusive and sustainable economic growth.

2. The Parties shall seek, if possible, to minimise duplication with existing economic
and technical cooperation between the Parties.

Article 19.2: Scope of Economic and Technical Cooperation

1. Economic and technical cooperation under this Chapter relates to trade and
investment commitments under this Agreement or any other areas of cooperation as the
Parties may decide.

2. The Parties shall undertake economic and technical cooperation activities, which
may include sharing best practices, exchanging expertise and information, promoting
innovation through dialogues, seminars, workshops, collaborative research and
development, or any other forms of cooperation as the Parties may decide.

Article 19.3: Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Economic and Technical
Cooperation (“Committee”) to support the implementation of this Chapter, composed of
government representatives of each Party.

2. The Parties shall jointly chair the Committee.
3. The Committee shall:
(a) develop an implementation plan as guidance for subsequent annual work

programs, which includes a set of outputs, outcomes, and indicators;

19-]

(b) develop annual work programs, which include a set of outputs, outcomes,
and indicators;

(c) coordinate with other committees, sub-committees, working groups, or
any other subsidiary bodies established under this Agreement, to identify
and implement appropriate economic and technical cooperation activities,
and to avoid duplication of work programs;

(d) consult or engage relevant stakeholders or external parties necessary to
establish and implement the Committee’s work programs;

(e) monitor and assess the progress in implementing economic and technical
cooperation activities;

(f) report to the Joint Committee;

(g) identify and resolve any emerging issues and concerns about the
implementation of economic and technical cooperation activities; and

(h) take any other actions in the exercise of its functions that the Parties may
decide.

4. The Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of this
Agreement. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, the Committee shall meet annually
thereafter.

5. Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communication between the
Parties on all matters relating to the implementation of this Chapter and shall update the
other Party on any changes to the details of the contact point.

Article 19.4: Resources

1. Resources for economic and technical cooperation under this Chapter shall be
provided as agreed by the Parties, taking into consideration the availability of resources.

2. Any resources provided under this Chapter shall be time-bound and subject to

performance indicators. Renewal of resources may be considered in the context of the
review of the Agreement pursuant to Article 26.4 (Final Provisions — Review).

Article 19.5: Relation to Other Chapters

Unless the Parties decide otherwise, this Chapter shall apply to all economic and
technical cooperation activities under this Agreement.

Article 19.6: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) does not apply to any matter arising under
this Chapter.

19-2

CHAPTER 20

BILATERAL DIALOGUES ON PRIORITY MATTERS

Article 20.1: Objective

1. The Parties recognise the importance of bilateral cooperation to address priority
trade matters to strengthen the partnership between the Parties with a view to achieving
their shared ambitions to develop secure and resilient critical mineral supply and value
chains and to facilitate cooperation on Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) matters.

2. Building on their strong economic partnership, the Parties aim to intensify their
cooperation to facilitate trade and investment.

Article 20.2: Bilateral Dialogues

1. The application of the Memorandum of Understanding Between the Government
of Canada and the Government of the Republic of Indonesia on the Establishment of a
Bilateral Dialogue on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Issues, signed at Jakarta

on 2 December 2024 will be in line with the objectives of this Chapter and further to the
objectives of Chapter 5 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures).

2. The application of the Memorandum of Understanding between the Government
of Canada and the Government of the Republic of Indonesia on Critical Mineral
Cooperation, signed at Jakarta on 2 December 2024 will be in line with the objectives of
this Agreement

3. The cooperation in paragraphs 1| and 2, if not already commenced, will take place
at the earliest opportunity following entry into force of this Agreement, taking into
account any ongoing collaborative efforts between the Parties’ relevant authorities.

4. On request of a Party to the Joint Committee established under Article 23.1
(Administrative and Institutional Provisions — Establishment of the Joint Committee), the
Parties may decide to enter into bilateral dialogues on other priority matters of common
interest, taking into account the Parties’ respective priorities in responding to global
economic development and challenges.

Article 20.3: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) does not apply to any matter arising under
this Chapter.

20-1

CHAPTER 21

GOOD REGULATORY PRACTICES AND REGULATORY COOPERATION

Article 21.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

good regulatory practices means the use of best practices in the process of planning,
designing, issuing, implementing, and reviewing regulatory measures to facilitate the
achievement of domestic policy objectives;

regulatory authority means an administrative authority or agency at a Party’s central
level of government that develops, proposes, or adopts a regulatory measure, except as
set out in Annex 21-A (Additional Provisions Concerning the Scope of “Regulatory
Measures” and “Regulatory Authorities”), and does not include legislatures or courts.

regulatory measure means a measure of general application at a Party’s central level of
government with which compliance is mandatory, except as set out in Annex 21-A
(Additional Provisions Concerning the Scope of “Regulatory Measures” and “Regulatory
Authorities”);

Article 21.2: General Provisions

1. Each Party shall encourage its regulatory authorities to adopt good regulatory
practices in order to facilitate and promote trade and investment, economic growth,
employment, and a transparent and predictable regulatory environment.

2. Each Party shall determine its approach to good regulatory practices under this
Agreement in a manner consistent with its own legal framework, practice, and
fundamental principles underlying its regulatory system.

3. The Parties affirm the importance of:

(a) maintaining and enhancing the benefits of cooperation promoted by the
Parties under this Agreement through the use of good regulatory practices
that facilitate increased trade in goods and services, as well as investment
between the Parties;

(b) each Party’s right to identify its regulatory priorities and to establish and
implement regulatory measures to address these priorities, in the areas and
by the levels of government that the Party considers appropriate;

(c) the role that regulatory measures play in achieving public policy
objectives;

(d) taking into account input from interested persons in the development of
regulatory measures;

' For Indonesia, regulatory measure refers to those measures set out in Articles 7(d) and (e), 12, and 13 of Law
Number 12/2011, as amended.

21-1

(e) developing measures to foster cooperation and capacity building of the
Parties; and

(f) taking measures to minimise unintended inequities or disparities within
and between groups of people likely to be impacted by a regulatory
initiative, particularly women and Indigenous Peoples.”

4. This Chapter does not require a Party to:

(a) take actions that would undermine or impede the timely adoption of
regulatory measures to achieve its public policy objectives, or would
otherwise risk undermining or compromising those public policy
objectives;

(b) achieve any particular regulatory outcome; or

(c) deviate from its domestic procedures for preparing and adopting
regulatory measures.

Article 21.3: Internal Coordination of Regulatory Development

1. The Parties recognise that good regulatory practices can be encouraged through
mechanisms and processes that facilitate coordination among regulatory authorities and
are associated with processes for the development and review of regulatory measures.
Accordingly, each Party shall endeavour to ensure the existence of those mechanisms or
processes, which may include establishing and maintaining a central coordinating body
for those mechanisms or processes.

2. The Parties recognise that their respective mechanisms or processes referred to in
paragraph | may vary depending on differences in their levels of development and
political and institutional structures. Each Party should describe the operation of its
mechanisms or processes in a manner that is publicly available. Each Party’s mechanisms
or processes should have as overarching characteristics the ability to:

(a) review proposed regulatory measures to determine whether the Party has
applied good regulatory practices, which may include those set out in this
Chapter, in their preparation, and make recommendations based on that
review;

(b) strengthen consultation and coordination among the Party’s regulatory
authorities to identify potential overlap and duplication of regulatory
measures, and to prevent the application of inconsistent requirements by
regulatory authorities;

(c) recommend government-wide regulatory improvements;

(d) ensure compliance with international trade and investment obligations;

> Indigenous Peoples refers to:

(a) for Canada, Aboriginal peoples (including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples) as defined in
subsection 35(2) of the Constitution Act, 1982 of Canada;
(b) for Indonesia, Masyarakat Hukum Adat in accordance with Indonesia’s laws and regulations.

21-2

(e) promote consideration of the impacts of the regulatory measures under
preparation, including on Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
(SMEs); and

(f) report to the public on regulatory measures that have been reviewed and
any proposals for government-wide regulatory improvement, as well as
any updates on changes to the processes and mechanisms referred to in
paragraph 1.

Article 21.4: Early Planning

1. Each Party should publish annually a list of any regulatory measures that it
reasonably expects its regulatory authorities to issue within the following 12-month
period.

2. Each Party should make publicly available, as early as possible:

(a) a brief description of the scope and objectives of a proposed regulatory
measure; and

(b) the estimated timing for adoption of the proposed regulatory measure,
including opportunities for public consultations.

Article 21.5: Regulatory Impact Assessments

1. To assist in designing a regulatory measure to best achieve the Party’s objective,
each Party shall endeavour to encourage its regulatory authorities, consistent with its laws
and regulations, to conduct regulatory impact assessments when developing regulatory
measures that meet certain criteria established by the Party.

2. Recognising that differences in the Parties’ institutional, social, cultural, legal,
and developmental circumstances may result in specific regulatory approaches, each
Party should ensure that the regulatory impact assessment procedures, among other
things:

(a) assess the need for a regulatory measure, including by providing a
description of the nature and significance of the problem that the
regulatory measure intends to address;

(b) identify and examine feasible alternatives to the regulatory measure,
including, to the extent possible and in accordance with the Party’s laws
and regulations, the corresponding costs and benefits, recognising that
some costs and benefits are difficult to quantify;

(c) provide an explanation of the reasons for concluding that the identified
alternatives achieve the policy objectives in an efficient manner,
including, if appropriate, reference to the costs and benefits and the
difficulty managing risks; and

(d) rely on the best reasonably available information, including relevant

scientific, technical, economic, or other information within the particular
regulatory authority’s mandate, capacity, and resources.

21-3

3. When conducting a regulatory impact assessment, each Party shall endeavour to
ensure that its regulatory authorities take into consideration the potential impacts of the
regulatory measure on SMEs.

Article 21.6: Public Consultations and Transparency
1. When preparing a regulatory measure, each Party shall endeavour to:

(a) publish the proposed regulatory measure on a government website that
would allow any person to assess whether and how its interests might be
significantly affected;

(b) encourage the publication of the regulatory impact assessment associated
with the proposed regulatory measure on a government website; and

(c) offer reasonable opportunities for any person, on a non-discriminatory
basis, to provide input on the proposed regulatory measure.

2. If a proposed regulatory measure is expected to have a significant impact on
international trade, the Party should normally provide a comment period of at least
60 days from the date that the proposed regulatory measure is published.

3. A Party shall consider public input received on the proposed regulatory measure.
A Party shall endeavour to make publicly available a summary of the results of
consultations, except to the extent necessary to protect confidential information, or to
withhold personal data, or inappropriate content.

Article 21.7: Use of Plain Language

Each Party should ensure that proposed and final regulatory measures are plainly
written, concise, organised, and easy to understand, recognising that some regulatory
measures involve technical issues for which relevant expertise or specialised knowledge
might be required to understand and apply them.

Article 21.8: Consideration of Other Measures

To the extent appropriate and consistent with its laws and regulations, each Party
should encourage its relevant regulatory authorities to consider regulatory measures of
the other Party, as well as relevant developments in international, regional, and other
forums, when developing regulatory measures.

Article 21.9: Public Access

Consistent with its laws and regulations, each Party shall endeavour to ensure that
its relevant regulatory authorities provide public access to new and existing regulatory
measures and, to the extent possible, make information on these measures available on a
government website.

Article 21.10: Retrospective Review

1. Each Party should review its regulatory measures, at intervals it deems
appropriate, to determine whether they should be modified or repealed to make them
more effective in achieving policy objectives and reduce unnecessary regulatory burdens,
including on SMEs.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to publish, to the extent possible, any official plans
and results of a review conducted under paragraph 1.

Article 21.11 Cooperation

The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in order to implement this Chapter and
maximise the benefits arising from it. In conducting the cooperation activities, each Party
should take into consideration the other Party’s needs and level of development.
Cooperation activities may include:

(a) information exchanges, dialogues, or meetings between officials of the
Parties;

(b) information exchange, dialogues, or meetings with interested persons,
including SMEs, of the Parties, and international organisations;

(c) training programs, seminars, and other assistance initiatives;

(d) further strengthening cooperation between the regulatory authorities of the
Parties; and

(e) other activities that the Parties may decide.

Article 21.12: Contact Points and Information Exchange on Implementation

1. Each Party shall designate and notify the other Party of a contact point for matters
arising under this Chapter. A Party shall promptly notify the other Party of any changes
to its contact point.

2. The contact points shall be responsible for facilitating cooperation activities under
this Chapter.
3. For the purposes of transparency, cooperation, and capacity building activities,

the Parties shall exchange information on the implementation of this Chapter.

4. Each Party shall provide an update to the Joint Committee established under
Article 23.1 (Administrative and Institutional Provisions — Establishment of the Joint
Committee) on an annual basis. This update may include the actions the Party has taken
to implement this Chapter and the actions it plans to take to implement this Chapter,
including those to:

(a) encourage its regulatory authorities to conduct regulatory impact
assessments in accordance with Article 21.5 (Regulatory Impact

Assessments);

(b) ensure that regulatory measures are accessible, in accordance with
Article 21.9 (Public Access);

21-5

(c) review existing regulatory measures, in accordance with Article 21.10
(Retrospective Review);

(d) publish annually, a list of any regulatory measures that it reasonably
expects its regulatory authorities to issue, in accordance with Article 21.4
(Early Planning);

(e) review developments in its good regulatory practices and its experiences
in implementing this Chapter with a view to considering making
recommendations to the Joint Committee for modifying this Chapter to
further enhance the benefits of this Agreement; and

(f) identify opportunities for future assistance or cooperation activities.

Article 21.13: Relationship to Other Chapters

In the event of an inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter of this
Agreement, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 21.14: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

A Party shall not have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 24 (Dispute
Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.

21-6

CHAPTER 22

TRANSPARENCY, ANTI-CORRUPTION, AND RESPONSIBLE BUSINESS
CONDUCT

Section A: Definitions

Article 22.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

act or refrain from acting in relation to the performance of official duties includes
any use of the public official’s position, whether or not within the official’s authorised
competence;

administrative ruling of general application means an administrative ruling or
interpretation that applies to all persons and factual situations that fall generally within
the ambit of that administrative ruling or interpretation and that establishes a norm of
conduct, but does not include:

(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or quasi-judicial
proceeding that applies to a particular person, good, or service of the other
Party in a specific case; or

(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or practice;

foreign public official means any person holding a legislative, executive, administrative,
or judicial office of a foreign country, at any level of government, whether appointed or
elected, whether permanent or temporary, whether paid or unpaid, irrespective of that
person’s seniority; and any person exercising a public function for a foreign country, at
any level of government, including for a public agency or public enterprise;

official of a public international organisation means an international civil servant or
any person who is authorised by a public international organisation to act on its behalf;

public official means:

(a) any person holding a legislative, executive, administrative or judicial
office of a Party, whether appointed or elected, whether permanent or
temporary, whether paid or unpaid, irrespective of that person’s seniority;

(b) any other person who performs a public function for a Party, including for
a public agency or public enterprise, or provides a public service, as
defined under the Party’s law and as applied in the pertinent area of that

Party’s law; or

(c) any other person defined as a public official under a Party’s law.

22-1

Section B: Transparency

Article 22.2: Publication

1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative
rulings of general application regarding any matter covered by this Agreement are
promptly published, including on the internet, where feasible, or made available in such a
manner as to enable an interested person and the other Party to become acquainted with
them.

2. Each Party shall, to the extent possible:

(a) publish in advance any measure mentioned in paragraph | that it proposes
to adopt; and

(b) provide a reasonable opportunity for an interested person and the other
Party to comment on the proposed measures.

3. To the extent possible, when introducing or changing the laws, regulations, or
procedures referred to in paragraph 1, each Party shall endeavour to provide a reasonable
period between the date when those laws, regulations, or procedures, proposed or final in
accordance with its legal system, are made publicly available and the date when they
enter into force.

4. With respect to a proposed regulation of general application of a Party’s central
level of government respecting any matter covered by this Agreement that is likely to
affect trade or investment between the Parties and that is published in accordance with
paragraph 2(a), each Party shall:

(a) endeavour to publish the proposed regulation in an official journal, or on
an official website, preferably online and consolidated into a single portal;

(b) endeavour to publish the proposed regulation:

(1) no less than 60 days in advance of the date on which comments are
due; or

(11) | within another period in advance of the date on which comments
are due that provides sufficient time for an interested person to
evaluate the proposed regulation, and formulate and submit
comments;

(c) to the extent possible, include in the publication under subparagraph (a) an
explanation of the purpose of, and rationale for, the proposed
regulation; and

(d) consider comments received during the comment period, and is
encouraged to explain any significant modifications made to the proposed
regulation, preferably on an official website or in an online journal.

5. Each Party shall, with respect to a regulation of general application adopted by its
central level of government respecting any matter covered by this Agreement that is

published in accordance with paragraph 1:

(a) promptly publish the regulation on a single online portal or in an official
journal of national circulation; and

22-2

(b) if appropriate, include with the publication an explanation of the purpose
of and rationale for the regulation.

Article 22.3: Notification and Provision of Information

1. A Party, to the extent possible, shall notify the other Party of any proposed or
existing measure that the Party considers might materially affect the operation of this
Agreement or that substantially affects the interest of the other Party pursuant to this
Agreement.

2. At the request of the other Party, a Party shall promptly provide information and
respond to questions related to any proposed or existing measure that the requesting Party
considers might materially affect the operation of this Agreement, regardless of whether
the requesting Party has been previously notified of that measure.

3. Any notification, request, or information related to this Article shall be
communicated through the relevant Contact Points.

4. Any notification provided, and any answer or information supplied, pursuant to
paragraph 1| and paragraph 2 are without prejudice as to whether the measure is consistent
with this Agreement.

Article 22.4: Administrative Proceedings

With a view to administering in a consistent, impartial, objective, and reasonable
manner all measures of general application with respect to any matter covered by this
Agreement, each Party shall ensure in its administrative proceedings applying measures
referred to in Article 22.2 (Publication) to a particular person, good, or service of the
other Party in specific cases that:

(a) whenever possible, a person of the other Party that is directly affected by a
proceeding is provided with reasonable notice, in accordance with
domestic procedures, of when a proceeding is initiated, including a
description of the nature of the proceeding, a statement of the legal
authority under which the proceeding is initiated, and a general description
of any issue in question;

(b) a person of the other Party that is directly affected by a proceeding is
afforded a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in
support of that person’s position prior to any final administrative action,
when time, the nature of the proceeding, and the public interest
permit; and

(c) the procedures are in accordance with its law.

22-3

Article 22.5: Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial or administrative
tribunals, or procedures for the purpose of the prompt review and, if warranted,
correction of final administrative actions regarding matters covered by this Agreement.
Each Party shall ensure that its tribunals are impartial and independent of the office or
authority entrusted with administrative enforcement and that they do not have any
substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, in any tribunal or procedure referred to in
paragraph 1, the parties to the proceedings are entitled to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective
positions; and

(b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions on the record or, where
required by that Party’s domestic law, on the record compiled by the
administrative authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided for in its
domestic law, that the decision referred to in paragraph 2(b) is implemented by, and
governs the practice of, the office or authority with respect to the administrative action at
issue.

Article 22.6: Cooperation on Promoting Increased Transparency

The Parties agree to cooperate in bilateral, regional, and multilateral fora on ways
to promote transparency in respect of international trade and investment.

Section C: Anti-Corruption

Article 22.7: Scope

1. The Parties recognise that bribery and other forms of corruption in trade and
investment activities can undermine democracy and rule of law, discourage trade and
foreign investment, and adversely affect the economic development of the Parties.

2. The Parties affirm their commitment to prevent and combat corruption and
bribery in international trade and investment with the understanding that this contributes
to efforts to substantially reduce corruption and bribery in all their forms.

3. The scope of this Section is limited to measures to prevent and combat corruption,
including bribery with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement.

4. The Parties recognise that the description of offences adopted or maintained in
accordance with this Section, and of the applicable legal defences or legal principles
controlling the lawfulness of conduct, is reserved to each Party’s law, and that those
offences shall be prosecuted and punished in accordance with each Party’s law.

22-4

5. Each Party affirms their adherence to the United Nations Convention against
Corruption, done at New York on 31 October 2003 (““UNCAC”), and, to the extent that
they are a party, the Inter-American Convention Against Corruption, done at Caracas on
29 March 1996, and the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public
Officials in International Business Transactions, done at Paris, France, on

17 December 1997.

6. The Parties reiterate their support for the principles contained in documents
developed by APEC and G20 anti-corruption working groups aimed at preventing and
combating corruption and endorsed by leaders or relevant ministers, including the G20
High Level Principles on organising against Corruption; G20 High Level Principles on
Corruption and Growth, G20 Guiding Principles on Enforcement of the Foreign Bribery
Offence, G20 Guiding Principles to Combat Solicitation, G20 High Level Principles on
the Liability of Legal Persons for Corruption, APEC Conduct Principles for Public
Officials, and the APEC Principles on the Prevention of Bribery and Enforcement of
Anti-Bribery Laws.

7. The Parties also reiterate their support for, and encourage awareness among their
private sectors of, available anti-corruption compliance guidance including the APEC
Code of Conduct for Business: Business Integrity and Transparency Principles for the
Private Sector, APEC General Elements of Effective Voluntary Corporate Compliance
Programs, and G20 High Level Principles on Private Sector Transparency and Integrity.

Article 22.8: Measures Against Corruption

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain legislative and other measures as may be
necessary to establish as criminal offences under its law, in matters that affect
international trade or investment, when committed intentionally, by any person subject to
its jurisdiction:

(a) the promise, offering or giving to a public official, directly or indirectly, of
an undue advantage, for the official or another person or entity, in order
that the official act or refrain from acting in relation to the performance of
or the exercise of his or her official duties;

(b) the solicitation or acceptance by a public official, directly or indirectly, of
an undue advantage for the official or another person or entity, in order
that the official act or refrain from acting in relation to the performance of
or the exercise of his or her official duties;

(c) the promise, offering or giving to a foreign public official or an official of
a public international organisation, directly or indirectly, of an undue
advantage for the official or another person or entity, in order that the
official act or refrain from acting in relation to the performance of or the
exercise of his or her official duties, in order to obtain or retain business or
other undue advantage in relation to the conduct of international
business; and

(d) the aiding or abetting, or conspiracy in the commission of any of the
offences described in subparagraphs (a) to (c).

22-5

2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain legislative and other measures as may be
necessary to establish as a criminal offence under its law, when committed intentionally,
by a person subject to its jurisdiction, the embezzlement, misappropriation or another
diversion by a public official for their benefit or for the benefit of another person or
entity, of property, public or private fund or security, or any other thing of value entrusted
to the public official by virtue of their position.

3. Each Party shall make the commission of an offence described in paragraph 1, 2
or 6 liable to sanctions that take into account the gravity of that offence.

4. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures as may be necessary, consistent with
its legal principles, to establish the liability of legal persons for offences described in
paragraphs 1 and 6. In particular, each Party shall ensure that there are measures that
provide for legal persons held liable for offences described in paragraphs | or 6 to be
subject to effective, proportionate and dissuasive criminal or non-criminal sanctions,
including monetary sanctions.

5. Each Party shall disallow the tax deductibility of expenses that constitute bribes
under subparagraphs 1(a) to 1(c) and, where appropriate, other expenses incurred in
furtherance of corrupt conduct.
6. In order to prevent corruption, each Party shall adopt or maintain measures as
may be necessary, in accordance with its laws and regulations, regarding the maintenance
of books and records, financial statement disclosures, and accounting and auditing
standards, to prohibit the following acts carried out for the purpose of committing any of
the offences described in paragraph 1:

(a) the establishment of off-the-books accounts;

(b) the making of off-the-books or inadequately identified transactions;

(c) the recording of non-existent expenditure;

(d) the entry of liabilities with incorrect identification of their objects;

(e) the use of false documents; and

(f) the intentional destruction of bookkeeping documents earlier than foreseen
by the law.
7. Each Party shall consider adopting or maintaining measures to protect, against

any unjustified treatment, any person who, in good faith and on reasonable grounds,
reports to the competent authorities any facts concerning offences described in
paragraphs 1, 2 or 6.

8. The Parties recognise the harmful effects of facilitation payments. Each Party
shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations:

(a) encourage enterprises to prohibit or discourage the use of facilitation
payments; and

(b) take steps to raise awareness among its public officials of its bribery laws,

with a view to stopping the solicitation and the acceptance of facilitation
payments.

22-6

Article 22.9: Cooperation

1. The Parties recognise the importance of regional and multilateral initiatives to
prevent and combat corruption, including bribery in international trade and investment.
The Parties intend to work together to advance efforts in regional and multilateral fora
and encourage and support appropriate initiatives to prevent and combat corruption,
including bribery in international trade and investment.

2. The Parties may establish and maintain a network connecting anti-corruption and
law enforcement authorities to share experiences, case studies, and best practices to help
develop capacity in combatting corruption and enhance cooperation between agencies
responsible for investigations and prosecution of corruption.

Article 22.10: Promoting Integrity among Public Officials

1. To fight corruption, each Party should promote, among other things, integrity,
honesty and responsibility among its public officials. To this end, each Party shall, in
accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system, adopt or maintain:

(a) measures to provide adequate procedures for the selection and training of
natural persons for public positions considered by the Party to be
especially vulnerable to corruption, and the rotation, if appropriate, of
those natural persons to other positions;

(b) measures to promote transparency in the behaviour of public officials in
the exercise of public functions;

(c) policies and procedures to identify and manage actual or potential
conflicts of interest of public officials;

(d) measures that require senior public officials, and other public officials as
determined by the Party, to make declarations to appropriate authorities
regarding, among other things, their outside activities, employment,
investments, assets and substantial gifts or benefits from which a conflict
of interest may result with respect to their functions as public officials; and

(e) measures to facilitate reporting by public officials of any facts concerning
offences described in Article 22.8.1, Article 22.8.2, or Article 22.8.6
(Measures Against Corruption) to appropriate authorities, if those acts
come to their notice in the performance of their functions.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to adopt or maintain codes or standards of conduct for
the correct, honourable, and proper performance of public functions, and measures
providing for disciplinary or other measures, if warranted, against public officials who
violate the codes or standards established or maintained in accordance with this
paragraph.

3. Each Party, to the extent consistent with the fundamental principles of its legal
system, shall consider establishing procedures through which a public official accused of
an offence described under Article 22.8.1 (Measures Against Corruption) may, where
considered appropriate by that Party, be removed, suspended, or reassigned by the
appropriate authority, bearing in mind respect for the principle of the presumption of
innocence.

22-7

4. Each Party shall, in accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system
and without prejudice to judicial independence, adopt or maintain measures to strengthen
integrity, and to prevent opportunities for corruption, among members of the judiciary in
matters that affect international trade or investment. These measures may include rules
with respect to the conduct of members of the judiciary.

Article 22.11: Participation of Private Sector and Society

1. Each Party shall take appropriate measures, within its means and in accordance
with fundamental principles of its legal system, to promote the active participation and
safety of individuals and groups outside the public sector, such as enterprises, civil
society, non-governmental organisations, women’s organisations, and community-based
organisations, in the prevention of and the fight against corruption in matters affecting
international trade or investment, and to raise public awareness regarding the existence,
causes and gravity of, and the threat posed by, corruption. To this end, a Party may, for
example:

(a) undertake inclusive public information activities and inclusive public
education programmes that contribute to non-tolerance of corruption;

(b) encourage professional associations and other non-governmental
organisations, if appropriate, in their efforts to support and assist
enterprises, in particular Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (“SMEs’’),
in developing internal controls, ethics, and compliance programmes or
measures for preventing and detecting bribery and corruption in
international trade and investment;

(c) encourage company management to make statements in their annual
reports or otherwise publicly disclose their internal controls, ethics, and
compliance programmes or measures, including those that contribute to
preventing and detecting bribery and corruption in international trade and
investment; and

(d) adopt or maintain measures that respect, promote, and protect the freedom
to seek, receive, publish and disseminate information concerning
corruption.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to encourage private enterprises, taking into account
their structure and size, and the sectors in which they operate, to:

(a) adopt or maintain sufficient internal auditing controls to assist in
preventing and detecting offences described in Article 22.8.1 or
Article 22.8.6 (Measures Against Corruption) in matters affecting
international trade or investment;

(b) ensure that their accounts and required financial statements are subject to
appropriate auditing and certification procedures; and

(c) establish compliance programs for the purpose of preventing and detecting
offences described in Article 22.8.1 or Article 22.8.6 (Measures Against
Corruption).

22-8

3. Each Party shall take appropriate measures to ensure that its relevant anti-
corruption bodies are known to the public and shall provide access to those bodies, if
appropriate, for the reporting, including anonymously, of any incident that may be
considered to constitute an offence described in Article 22.8.1 (Measures Against
Corruption).

Article 22.12: Application and Enforcement of Anti-Corruption Laws

1. In accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system, a Party shall not
fail to effectively enforce its laws or other measures adopted or maintained to comply
with Article 22.8 (Measures to Combat Corruption) through a sustained or recurring
course of action or inaction, after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, as an
encouragement for trade and investment. The Parties recognise that individual cases or
specific discretionary decisions related to the enforcement of anti-corruption laws are
subject to each Party’s domestic law and legal procedures.

2. In accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system, each Party
retains the right for its law enforcement, prosecutorial, and judicial authorities to exercise
their discretion with respect to the enforcement of its anti-corruption laws. Each Party
retains the right to take decisions with regard to the allocation of its resources.

3. The Parties affirm their commitments under applicable international agreements,
or arrangements to cooperate with each other, consistent with their respective legal and
administrative systems, to enhance the effectiveness of law enforcement actions to
combat the offences described in Article 22.8 (Measures to Combat Corruption).

Article 22.13: Relation to Other Agreements

Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of the Parties
under the United Nations Convention against Transnational organised Crime, done at
New York on 15 November 2000 (““UNTOC’), and to the extent that they are a party, the
Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business
Transaction, with its Annex, done at Paris on 21 November 1997, or the Inter-American
Convention Against Corruption, done at Caracas on 29 March 1996.

Article 22.14: Dispute Resolution

1. Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement) does not apply to a matter arising under this
Section.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a Party may request consultations pursuant to

Article 24.5 (Dispute Settlement — Consultations) if it considers that a measure of the
other Party is inconsistent with an obligation under this Section, or that the other Party
has otherwise failed to carry out an obligation under this Section, in a manner affecting
trade or investment between Parties.

3. The consulting Parties shall make every effort to find a mutually satisfactory

resolution, which may include appropriate cooperative activities or a work plan to
address the matter.

22-9

Section D: Responsible Business Conduct and Corporate
Social Responsibility

Article 22.15: Responsible Business Conduct and Corporate Social Responsibility

1. Each Party recognises the importance of responsible business conduct and
corporate social responsibility, and commits to collaborate with relevant stakeholders to
develop, adopt, promote, strengthen, and implement policies that support a responsible
business environment.

2. Each Party affirms that enterprises operating within its jurisdiction have a duty to
comply with all its applicable laws, such as those concerning human rights, the rights of
Indigenous Peoples!, environmental protection, and labour.

3. Each Party shall encourage enterprises organised or constituted under its law, or
operating in its territory, including SMEs, to incorporate into their business practices and
internal policies those internationally recognised standards, guidelines, and principles of
responsible business conduct and corporate social responsibility that have been endorsed
or are supported by that Party, and that address issues such as labour, environment,
human rights, and anti-corruption, such as the OECD Guidelines on Multinational
Enterprises, the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, and the UN
Global Compact.

4. Each Party should encourage investors or enterprises operating within its territory
to undertake and maintain meaningful engagement and dialogue, in accordance with
international responsible business conduct standards, guidelines, and principles that have
been endorsed or are supported by that Party, with Indigenous Peoples” and local
communities, as applicable.

' Indigenous Peoples refers to:

(a) for Canada, Aboriginal peoples (including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples) as defined in
subsection 35(2) of the Constitution Act, 1982 of Canada;
(b) for Indonesia, Masyarakat Hukum Adat in accordance with Indonesia’s laws and regulations.

> Indigenous Peoples refers to:

(a) for Canada, Aboriginal peoples (including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples) as defined in
subsection 35(2) of the Constitution Act, 1982 of Canada;
(b) for Indonesia, Masyarakat Hukum Adat in accordance with Indonesia’s laws and regulations.

22-10

CHAPTER 23

ADMINISTRATIVE AND INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 23.1: Establishment of the Joint Committee

The Parties hereby establish a Joint Committee, composed of government
representatives of each Party. The Joint Committee will be co-chaired by government
representatives of each Party at the level of Ministers, or by their designees.

Article 23.2: Functions of the Joint Committee

1. The Joint Committee shall:

(a)

consider ways to further enhance trade and investment between the
Parties;

(b) consider any matter relating to the implementation or operation of this
Agreement;

(c) supervise the work of the committees, sub-committees, working groups,
and other subsidiary bodies established under this Agreement (“subsidiary
bodies’’);

(d) without prejudice to Chapter 24 (Dispute Settlement), seek to prevent
problems that might arise in areas covered by this Agreement, and to
resolve disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation or application
of this Agreement; and

(e) review this Agreement and its implementation in accordance with
Article 26.4 (Final Provisions — Review).

2. The Joint Committee may:

(a) establish, merge, or dissolve subsidiary bodies established under this
Agreement, and determine their responsibilities, to improve the
functioning of this Agreement;

(b) delegate responsibilities to the Agreement Coordinators established under
Article 23.5 (Agreement Coordinators);

(c) seek advice of a non-governmental person or entity;

(d) adopt interpretative decisions concerning this Agreement binding on

panels established under Article 24.7 (Dispute Settlement — Request for
the Establishment of a Panel) and on tribunals established under Section D
of Chapter 13 (Investment — Investor-State Dispute Settlement);

23-1

(e) adopt a modification to this Agreement of:

(1) a Party’s Schedule to Annex 2-A (Tariff Commitments) to
accelerate tariff elimination or improve market access conditions;

(11) the rules of origin established in Annex 3-B (Product-Specific
Rules of Origin); or

(iii) | the minimum data elements under Annex 3-A (Minimum Data
Elements of the Declaration of Origin);

(f) consider any proposal to amend or modify the rights and obligations under
this Agreement; and

(g) take any other action in the exercise of its functions as the Parties may
decide.

3. The modifications referred to in paragraph 2(e) are subject to the completion of
the necessary domestic legal procedures of either Party.

Article 23.3: Meetings of the Joint Committee

1. The Joint Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of
this Agreement and thereafter as the Parties may decide, or at the request in writing of a
Party. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, meetings of the Joint Committee shall be held
in person alternately in the territory of each Party, or virtually by any means available.

2. If the Joint Committee meets at the level of Ministers, it may be preceded by a
meeting at the level of senior officials.

Article 23.4: Decision-Making and Rules of Procedure

1. Decisions and recommendations of the Joint Committee and subsidiary bodies
shall be taken by consensus.

2. The Joint Committee and subsidiary bodies may establish their own rules of
procedure.
3. If a Party provides information to the other Party in relation to a meeting of the

Joint Committee or a subsidiary body and designates the information as confidential, the
Party receiving the information shall maintain the confidentiality of the information.

Article 23.5: Agreement Coordinators
1. Each Party shall designate an Agreement Coordinator and notify the other Party in

writing within 60 days following the entry into force of this Agreement. Each Party shall
promptly notify the other Party any changes to its Agreement Coordinator.

23-2

2. The Agreement Coordinators shall:

(a) monitor the work of all subsidiary bodies and, as appropriate, make
recommendations regarding the functioning of this Agreement to the Joint
Committee;

(b) coordinate preparations for Joint Committee meetings;

(c) respond to any information requests pursuant to Article 22.3
(Transparency, Anti-Corruption, and Responsible Business Conduct —
Notification and Provision of information);

(d) receive all notifications and information provided pursuant to this
Agreement, unless otherwise provided in this Agreement;

(e) facilitate communications between the Parties on any matter covered by
this Agreement;

(f) discharge any other responsibilities delegated by the Joint Committee
under Article 23.2.2(b) (Functions of the Joint Committee); and

(g) maintain an updated list of chapter-specific subsidiary bodies and contact
points.

3. The Agreement Coordinators shall meet and communicate as often as required.

Meetings may be held in person or virtually.

4. A Party may request in writing at any time that a special meeting of the
Agreement Coordinators be held. The Agreement Coordinators shall endeavour to meet
within 30 days following the receipt of a request.

23-3

CHAPTER 24

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Section A: Dispute Settlement

Article 24.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:

complaining Party means a Party that requests the establishment of a panel under
Article 24.7 (Request for the Establishment of a Panel);

panel means a panel established under Article 24.7 (Request for the Establishment of a
Panel);

panellist means a member of a panel established under Article 24.7 (Request for the
Establishment of a Panel); and

responding Party means a Party that has been complained against under Article 24.7
(Request for the Establishment of a Panel).

Article 24.2: Cooperation

The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation and
application of this Agreement and shall make every attempt through cooperation and
discussion to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of any matter that might affect its
operation.

Article 24.3: Scope and Coverage

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the provisions of this Chapter
shall apply to the settlement of all disputes between the Parties regarding the
interpretation or application of this Agreement or wherever a Party considers that:

(a) an actual or proposed measure of the other Party is or would be
inconsistent with one of its obligations under this Agreement; or

(b) the other Party has otherwise failed to carry out one of its obligations
under this Agreement.

Article 24.4: Choice of Forum
1. Disputes regarding any matter arising under both this Agreement and the WTO

Agreement or any other free trade agreement to which the Parties are party may be settled
in either forum at the discretion of the complaining Party.

24-1

2. If a complaining Party requests the establishment of a panel or its equivalent
under an agreement referred to in paragraph 1, the forum selected shall be used to the
exclusion of the other. This paragraph shall not apply if substantially separate and distinct
rights or obligations are in dispute.

Article 24.5: Consultations

1. A Party may request in writing consultations with the other Party regarding any
matter referred to in Article 24.3 (Scope and Coverage).

2. The Party requesting consultations shall deliver the written request for
consultations to the other Party, and shall set out the reasons for the request, including the
identification of the measure, proposed measure, or other matter at issue under

Article 24.3 (Scope and Coverage), and indicating the legal basis for the complaint.

3. Subject to paragraph 4, the Parties shall enter into consultations within 30 days of
the date of receipt of the request by the other Party, unless the Parties decide otherwise.

4. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods, the Parties shall
enter into consultations within 15 days of the date of receipt of the request by the other
Party.

5. The Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution
of the matter through consultations under this Article. To this end, each Party shall:

(a) provide sufficient information to enable a full examination of the measure,
proposed measure, or other matter at issue under Article 24.3 (Scope and
Coverage);

(b) make available personnel of its governmental agencies or other regulatory
bodies with expertise in the subject matter of the consultations; and

(c) treat any confidential or proprietary information received in the course of
consultations on the same basis as the Party providing the information.

6. Consultations are confidential and without prejudice to the rights of the Parties in
proceedings under this Chapter.

7. Consultations may be held in person or by any other means decided by the
Parties.

Article 24.6: Good Offices, Conciliation, and Mediation

1. The Parties may at any time decide to undertake an alternative method of dispute
resolution, such as good offices, conciliation, or mediation. A Party shall at all times
exercise its judgment as to whether an alternative method of dispute resolution may be
fruitful. If a Party determines that an alternative method of dispute resolution may be
fruitful, it shall request in writing agreement from the other Party to undertake an
alternative method of dispute resolution. The other Party shall give good faith
consideration to this request.

24-2

2. Mediation shall be conducted according to the mediation procedures set out in
Annex 24-A (Rules of Procedure for Mediation), unless the Parties decide otherwise.
Other alternative methods of dispute resolution shall be conducted according to
procedures decided by the Parties.

3. The Parties shall begin, suspend, or terminate mediation proceedings according to
the mediation procedures set out in Annex 24-A (Rules of Procedure for Mediation),
unless the Parties decide otherwise. The Parties may at any time begin, suspend, or
terminate other alternative dispute resolution proceedings established under this Article.

4. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation, and mediation are confidential
and without prejudice to the rights of the Parties in any other proceedings under this
Chapter.

5. If the Parties decide, good offices, conciliation, or mediation may continue while
panel proceedings provided for in this Chapter are in progress.

Article 24.7: Request for the Establishment of a Panel

1. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, if a matter referred to in Article 24.5
(Consultations) has not been resolved within:

(a) 45 days after the date of receipt of the request for consultations; or

(b) 25 days after the date of receipt of the request for consultations for matters
referred to Article 24.5.4 (Consultations),

the Party requesting consultations may refer the matter to a panel.
2. A panel shall not be established to review a proposed measure.

3. The complaining Party shall deliver a written request for the establishment of a
panel to the responding Party. In this request, the complaining Party shall indicate the
reason for the request, identify the measure or other matter at issue under Article 24.3
(Scope and Coverage), and provide a brief summary of the legal basis of the complaint
sufficient to present the problem clearly.

Article 24.8: Panel Composition
1. The panel shall comprise three panellists.

2. Each Party shall, within 30 days after the date of receipt of the request for
establishment of the panel, appoint a panellist, propose up to four candidates to serve as
the chair of the panel, and notify the other Party in writing of the appointment and its
proposed candidates to serve as the chair. If a Party fails to appoint a panellist within this
time, the panellist shall be appointed by the other Party from the candidates proposed for
chair by each Party.

24-3

3. The Parties shall endeavour to decide on the chair from among the candidates
proposed within 45 days after the date of receipt of the request for establishment of the
panel. If the Parties fail to decide on the chair within this time period, within a further
seven days the chair shall be selected by lot from the candidates proposed and shall be
appointed to the panel, unless the Parties decide otherwise.

4. If a panellist withdraws, is removed, or becomes unable to serve, all time periods
applicable to that panel’s proceedings shall be suspended until the date a replacement is
appointed. The Parties shall appoint the replacement as follows:

(a) a panellist appointed by a Party shall be replaced by that Party within
15 days, failing which the replacement shall be appointed in accordance
with the second sentence of paragraph 2;

(b) a chair shall be replaced by a person selected by both Parties within
15 days, failing which the replacement shall be appointed in accordance
with the second sentence of paragraph 3; and

(c) if an appointment in subparagraphs (a) or (b) would require selecting from
the chair candidates and there are no remaining chair candidates, each
Party shall propose up to three additional candidates within 15 days and
the Parties shall then follow the applicable procedure in subparagraphs (a)
or (b).

5. If a Party believes that a panellist is in violation of the Code of Conduct
referenced in Article 24.9.1(f) (Qualifications of Panellists), the Parties shall consult. If
the Parties concur on removing the panellist, the panellist shall be removed and a new
panellist shall be selected in accordance with this Article.

6. If a Party believes that a panellist or a candidate for chair does not meet the
requirements in Articles 24.9.1 or 24.9.3 (Qualifications of Panellists), the Parties shall
consult within 10 days after that individual was appointed or proposed. If the Parties
concur that a panellist does not meet the requirements, the panellist shall be removed, and
a new panellist shall be selected in accordance with paragraph 4. If the Parties concur that
a candidate for chair does not meet the requirements, the candidate shall be withdrawn,
and a new candidate proposed within 10 days.

Article 24.9: Qualifications of Panellists
1. Each panellist shall:
(a) have expertise or experience in law, international trade, other matters
covered by this Agreement, or in the settlement of disputes arising under

international trade agreements;

(b) be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity, reliability, and sound
judgment;

24-4

(c) be independent, serve in their individual capacity, not be affiliated with or
employed by a Party, and not take instructions from any Party or
organisation;

(d) not be a national of a Party, nor have their usual place of residence in the
territory of a Party;

(e) not have dealt with the matter at issue in any capacity, including
involvement in an alternative dispute resolution proceeding referred to in
Article 24.6 (Good Offices, Conciliation, and Mediation); and

(f) comply with Annex 24-C (Code of Conduct).

2. The Parties shall endeavour to include greater diversity in panel appointments,
including through the increased representation of women appointed to panels. To this
end, the Parties shall endeavour to appoint at least one woman to each panel.

3. For a dispute arising under Chapter 17 (Trade and Sustainable Development),
each Party shall select panellists in accordance with the following requirements, in
addition to those set out in paragraphs | and 2:
(a) in any dispute arising under Section B (Trade and Environment), panellists
other than the chair shall have expertise or experience in environmental

law or practice; and

(b) in any dispute arising under Section C (Trade and Labour), panellists other
than the chair shall have expertise or experience in labour law or practice.

Article 24.10: Rules of Procedure and Terms of Reference of Panels

1. A panel established under this Chapter shall follow the rules of procedure set out
in Annex 24-B (Rules of Procedure). A panel may establish, in consultation with the
Parties, supplementary rules of procedure that do not conflict with the provisions of this
Chapter.

2. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, the rules of procedure shall ensure:

(a) each Party has the opportunity to provide initial and rebuttal written
submissions;

(b) the Parties have the right to at least one hearing before the panel, and that
subject to subparagraph (g), these hearings shall be open to the public;

(c) that all written submissions and oral arguments shall be made in English;

(d) that all submissions and comments made to the panel shall be available to
the other Party;

24-5

(e) subject to subparagraph (g), that a Party may make available to the public
a Party’s written submissions, written versions of its oral statements and
written responses to requests or questions from the panel;

(f) that the panel allows a non-governmental entity of a Party to provide
written views regarding the dispute that may assist the panel in evaluating
the submissions and arguments of the Parties; and

(g) the protection of information designated by either Party for confidential
treatment.

3. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, within 15 days after the date of the
establishment of the panel, the terms of reference of the panel shall be:

“To examine in the light of the relevant provisions of the Agreement, the matter
referred to in the request for the establishment of the panel and to make findings,
determinations, and recommendations as provided in Article 24.11 (Panel
Reports)”.

4. If the complaining Party requests the panel to make a finding as to the degree of
adverse trade effects on a Party of any measure found not to conform to the obligations in
this Agreement, the terms of reference shall so indicate.

5. At the request of a Party, or on its own initiative, the panel may seek information
or technical advice from a person or body it deems appropriate subject to any terms and
conditions that the Parties may decide. The Parties shall have an opportunity to comment
on information or technical advice obtained.

6. The panel may rule on its own competence.

7. The panel may delegate to the chair authority to make administrative and
procedural decisions.

8. The panel may, in consultation with the Parties, modify any time-period
applicable in the panel proceedings and make other procedural or administrative
adjustments as may be required for the fairness or efficiency of the proceeding.

9. Findings, determination, and recommendations of the panel under Article 24.11
(Panel Reports) shall be made by consensus. If the panel is unable to reach consensus, it
may make its findings, determinations, and recommendations by a majority of its
members.

10. Panellists may furnish separate opinions on matters not unanimously agreed.
A panel may not disclose which panellist is associated with a majority or minority

opinion.

11. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, the expenses of the panel, including the
remuneration of the panellists, shall be borne in equal shares between the Parties.

24-6

Article 24.11: Panel Reports

1. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, the panel shall issue a panel report in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

2. The panel shall base its panel report on the provisions of this Agreement, applied
and interpreted in accordance with the rules of interpretation of public international law,
the submissions and arguments of the Parties, and any information or technical advice put
before it pursuant to Article 24.10.5 (Rules of Procedure and Terms of Reference of
Panels).

3. When interpreting an obligation under this Agreement which is incorporated by
reference from the WTO Agreement, the panel shall take into consideration any relevant
interpretation established in reports adopted by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body as
well as any authoritative interpretations of the WTO General Council and Ministerial
Conference.

4. The findings, determinations, and recommendations of the panel shall not add to
or diminish the rights and obligations of the Parties under this Agreement.

5. The panel shall issue an interim panel report to the disputing Parties within
150 days after the last panellist is appointed or, in cases of urgency, within 120 days. The
interim panel report shall contain:

(a) findings of fact;

(b) a determination as to whether the responding Party has conformed with its
obligations under this Agreement and any other finding or determination
requested in the terms of reference; and

(c) recommendations for resolution of the dispute, if requested by a Party.

6. The interim panel report shall be confidential.

7. A Party may submit written comments to the panel on its interim panel report,
subject to time limits that may be set by the panel. After considering those comments, the
panel, on its own initiative or on the request of either Party, may:

(a) request the views of a Party;
(b) reconsider its interim panel report; or
(c) make any further examination that it considers appropriate.

8. The panel shall issue a final panel report within 30 days of the issuance of the
interim panel report.

9. The final panel report is binding on the Parties as from the date on which it is
issued and shall not be subject to appeal.

10. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, each Party shall make the final panel report

publicly available 15 days after it is issued, subject to the protection of information
designated for confidential treatment.

24-7

Article 24.12: Implementation of the Final Panel Report

1. On receipt of the final report of a panel, the Parties shall decide on the resolution
of the dispute. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, the resolution shall be in conformity
with the determinations and any recommendations of the panel.

2. Wherever possible, the resolution shall be the removal of a measure or
rectification of a matter found by the panel to be inconsistent or otherwise not in
conformity with an obligation in this Agreement.

3. If the Parties are unable to decide on a resolution within 45 days of the date the
final panel report was issued to the Parties, or within another period as the Parties may
decide, the responding Party shall, if so requested by the complaining Party, enter into
negotiations with a view to deciding mutually satisfactory compensation.

Article 24.13: Non-Implementation - Suspension of Benefits

1. The complaining Party may, subject to paragraph 5, suspend the application of
benefits to the responding Party of equivalent effect until such time as the Parties have
reached a decision on a resolution of the dispute if:

(a) no decision on compensation has been reached under Article 24.12.3
(Implementation of the Final Panel Report) within 20 days after the date of
the complaining Party’s request;

(b) 45 days have passed following the issuance of the final panel report if
compensation is not requested under Article 24.12.3 (Implementation of
the Final Panel Report); or

(c) the Parties have decided on the resolution of the dispute or on
compensation, and the complaining Party considers that the responding
Party has failed to observe the terms of that decision.

2. The complaining Party may suspend benefits under paragraph | only after
providing notice to the responding Party that specifies the level of benefits that the
complaining Party proposes to suspend.

3. In considering which benefits to suspend under paragraph 1:

(a) the complaining Party should first seek to suspend benefits or other
obligations in the same sector as that affected by the measure or other
matter that the panel has found to be inconsistent with the obligation under
this Agreement; and

(b) if the complaining Party considers it is not practicable or effective to
suspend benefits or other obligations in the same sector, the complaining

Party may suspend benefits in another sector.

4. The level of benefits to be suspended shall be calculated starting from the date the
final panel report was issued to the Parties.

24-8

5. The complaining party shall suspend benefits only until:

(a) the measure or other matter found to be inconsistent with the obligations
of this Agreement has been brought into conformity with this Agreement,
including as a result of the panel process described in Article 24.14
(Review of Compliance and Suspension of Benefits); or

(b) the Parties have otherwise reached a mutually satisfactory resolution.

Article 24.14: Review of Compliance and Suspension of Benefits

1. A Party may, by written notice to the other Party, request that a panel be
reconvened to make a determination with respect to:

(a) whether the level of benefits suspended by a Party under Article 24.13.1
(Non-Implementation - Suspension of Benefits) is manifestly excessive; or

(b) a disagreement as to the existence or consistency with this Agreement of a
measure taken to comply with the determinations or recommendations of
the previously established panel.

2. In the written notice of the request referred to in paragraph 1, the Party shall
identify the measure or other matter at issue under Article 24.3 (Scope and Coverage) and
provide a brief summary of the legal basis of the complaint sufficient to present the
problem clearly.

3. The panel shall be reconvened either:

(a) upon receipt by the other Party of a written notice referred to in
paragraph 1; or

(b) in the event that any original panel member is unable to serve on the
panel, on the date on which a replacement panel member is appointed in
accordance with the provisions of Article 24.8 (Panel Composition).

4. The provisions of Articles 24.10 (Rules of Procedure and Terms of Reference of
Panels) and 24.11 (Panel Reports) apply to procedures adopted and reports issued by the
panel reconvened under this Article, with the exception that the panel shall:

(a) present a final report within 45 days of being reconvened where the
request concerns subparagraph 1(a) only, and otherwise within 90 days;
and

(b) present an interim report 15 days prior to presenting a final report.

5. A panel reconvened under this Article may include in its final report a

recommendation, where appropriate, that any suspension of benefits be terminated or that
the amount of benefits suspended be modified.

24-9

Section B: Domestic Proceedings and Private
Commercial Dispute Settlement

Article 24.15: Referrals of Matters from Judicial or Administrative Proceedings

1. If an issue of interpretation or application of this Agreement arises in any
domestic judicial or administrative proceeding of a Party that a Party considers would
merit its intervention, or if a court or administrative body solicits the views of a Party,
that Party shall notify the other Party. The Joint Committee, established under

Article 23.1 (Administrative and Institutional Provisions — Establishment of the Joint
Committee), shall endeavour to decide on an appropriate response as expeditiously as
possible.

2. The Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located shall
submit any agreed interpretation of the Joint Committee to the court or administrative
body in accordance with the rules of that forum.

3. If the Joint Committee is unable to agree, a Party may submit its own views to the
court or administrative body in accordance with the rules of that forum.

Article 24.16: Private Rights

A Party shall not provide for a right of action under its domestic law against the
other Party on the ground that the other Party has failed to conform with one of its
obligations under this Agreement.

Article 24.17: Alternative Dispute Resolution

1. Each Party shall, to the maximum extent possible, encourage and facilitate the use
of arbitration and other means of alternative dispute resolution for the settlement of
international commercial disputes between private parties in the free trade area.

2. To this end, each Party shall provide appropriate procedures to ensure observance
of agreements to arbitrate and for the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards in
those disputes.

3. A Party shall be deemed to be in compliance with paragraph 2 if it is a party to

and is in compliance with the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York on 10 June 1958.

24-10

CHAPTER 25

EXCEPTIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section A: Exceptions

Article 25.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

cultural industry means a person engaged in the following activities:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

the publication, distribution, or sale of books, magazines, periodicals or
newspapers in print or machine readable form but not including the sole
activity of printing or typesetting any of the foregoing;

the production, distribution, sale or exhibition of film or video recordings;

the production, distribution, sale or exhibition of audio or video music
recordings;

the publication, distribution or sale of music in print or machine readable
form; or

radiocommunications in which the transmissions are intended for direct
reception by the general public, and all radio, television and cable
broadcasting undertakings and all satellite programming and broadcast
network services.

Article 25.2: General Exceptions

1. For the purposes of Chapter 2 (National Treatment and Market Access for
Goods), Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures), Chapter 4 (Customs
Procedures and Trade Facilitation), Chapter 5 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures),
Chapter 6 (Technical Barriers to Trade), and Section B of Chapter 15 (Competition
Policy and State-Owned Enterprises), Article XX of the GATT 1994, and its
interpretative notes, is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.

2. The Parties understand that:

(a)

(b)

the measures referred to in Article XX(b) of the GATT 1994 include
environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life
or health; and

Article XX(g) of the GATT 1994 applies to measures relating to the
conservation of living and non-living exhaustible natural resources.

25-1

3. For the purposes of Chapter 8 (Trade in Services), Chapter 9 (Temporary
Movement of Natural Persons), Chapter 11 (Telecommunications), Chapter 12
(Electronic Commerce) and Section B of Chapter 15 (Competition Policy and State-
Owned Enterprises), the chapeau, as well as paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of Article XIV of
GATS are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.

4. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XIV(b) of GATS
include environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or
health.

5. The Parties recognise that the measures under Article XX(b) or XX(g) of
GATT 1994 or Article XIV(b) of the GATS:

(a) include those taken by the Parties to address climate change, including
those to implement their respective commitments under the UNFCCC and
the Paris Agreement; and

(b) may include measures taken to implement multilateral environmental
agreements.

6. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from taking
action, including maintaining or increasing a customs duty, that is authorised by the
Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO or is taken as a result of a decision by a dispute
settlement panel under a free trade agreement to which the Party taking action and the
Party against which the action is taken are party.

Article 25.3: National Security
This Agreement does not:

(a) require either Party to furnish or allow access to information if that Party
determines that the disclosure of the information would be contrary to its
essential security interests;

(b) prevent a Party from taking an action that it considers necessary to protect
its essential security interests:

(1) related to the production of or traffic in arms, ammunition, and
implements of war and to such traffic and transactions in other
goods and materials, services and technology undertaken, and to
economic activities, carried out directly or indirectly for the
purpose of supplying a military or other security establishment;

(11) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations,
or relating to the implementation of national policies or
international agreements respecting the non-proliferation of
biological weapons, chemical weapons, nuclear weapons, or other
nuclear explosive devices; or

25-2

(iii) taken to protect its critical public infrastructure,! including critical
information and communication infrastructure, financial
infrastructure, energy infrastructure and water infrastructure, from
deliberate attempts intended to disable, degrade or otherwise
interfere with such infrastructure, or to mitigate the threat thereof;

(c) prevent a Party from taking action in pursuance of its obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations, done at San Francisco on 26 June 1945 for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

Article 25.4: Taxation
1. For the purposes of this Article:

tax convention means a convention for the avoidance of double taxation or other
international taxation agreement or arrangement to which Canada or Indonesia is
party; and

taxes and taxation measures include excise duties, but do not include:

(a) a “customs duty” as defined in Article 2.1 (National Treatment and Market
Access for Goods — Definitions); or

(b) a measure listed in subparagraphs (b), (c) and (d) of that definition.

2. Except as provided in this Article, this Agreement does not apply to taxation
measures.
3. Article 2.3 (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods — National

Treatment) applies to taxation measures to the same extent as does Article III of
GATT 1994.

4. Subject to paragraph 9, Article 13.11 (Investment — Transfer of Funds) applies to
taxation measures. However, Section D of Chapter 13 (Investment — Investor-State
Dispute Settlement) does not apply to Article 13.11 (investment — Transfer of Funds) in
respect of taxation measures.

5. Subject to paragraph 9, Article 13.6 (Investment — National Treatment),

Article 8.3 (Trade in Services — National Treatment), and Article 10.3 (Financial
Services — National Treatment) apply to all taxation measures, other than taxation
measures on income, on capital gains, on the taxable capital of corporations, on the value
of an investment or property (but not on the transfer of that investment or property), or
taxes on estates, inheritances, and gifts. Nothing in the Articles referred to in this
paragraph applies to:

(a) a non-conforming provision of any existing taxation measure;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of a non-conforming provision of any
existing taxation measure; or

' For clarity, this includes critical public infrastructure whether publicly or privately owned.

25-3

(c)

(b)

an amendment to a non-conforming provision of any existing taxation
measure to the extent that the amendment does not decrease its
conformity, at the time of the amendment, with any of those Articles.

Article 13.10 (Investment — Expropriation) applies to taxation measures.
However, no investor may invoke Article 13.10 (Investment —
Expropriation) as the basis for a claim if it has been determined pursuant
to this paragraph that the taxation measure is not an expropriation. An
investor that seeks to invoke Article 13.10 (Investment — Expropriation)
with respect to a taxation measure must first refer to the competent
authorities of the Party of the investor and the respondent Party, at the
time that it makes its request for consultations under Article 13.23
(Investment — Request for Consultations), the issue of whether that
taxation measure 1s not an expropriation. If the competent authorities do
not agree to consider the issue or, having agreed to consider it, fail to
agree that the taxation measure is not an expropriation within a period of
180 days of the referral, the investor may submit its claim to arbitration
under Article 13.25 (Investment — Submission of a Claim to Arbitration).

For the purposes of this paragraph, competent authorities means:

(1) with respect to Indonesia, the Minister of Finance or his or her
authorised representative;

(11) | with respect to Canada, the Assistant Deputy Minister for Tax
Policy, Department of Finance;

or any successor of these competent authorities as notified in writing to the
other Party.

7. The determination of whether a taxation measure constitutes an expropriation
requires a case-by-case, fact-based inquiry that considers all relevant factors, including
the factors set out in Article 13.10(3) (Investment — Expropriation). The Parties confirm
their understanding that:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

a non-discriminatory taxation measure of a Party that is adopted and
maintained in good faith does not generally constitute an expropriation.
The mere introduction of new taxation measures or the imposition of taxes
in more than one jurisdiction in respect of an investment, does not in and
itself constitute an expropriation;

a taxation measure, including measures aimed at preventing the avoidance
or evasion of taxes, which is consistent with internationally recognised tax
policies, principles and practices, does not generally constitute an
expropriation;

a taxation measure of general application which 1s applied in good faith on
a non-discriminatory basis, as opposed to being targeted at investors of a
particular nationality or specific individual taxpayers, is not likely to
constitute an expropriation; and

a taxation measure which is applied in good faith on a non-discriminatory
basis, does not generally constitute expropriation if, when the investment
is made, it was already in force and information about the measure was
made public or otherwise made publicly available.

25-4

8. Subject to paragraph 9, nothing in the Articles referred to in paragraph 5 applies
to the adoption or enforcement of any taxation measure aimed at ensuring the equitable or
effective imposition or collection of taxes, including any taxation measure that
differentiates between persons based on their place of residence for tax purposes,
provided that the taxation measure does not arbitrarily discriminate between persons,
goods or services of the Parties.”

9. Nothing in this Agreement affects the rights and obligations of either Party under
any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any
such tax convention, that convention shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

10. Nothing in this Agreement obliges a Party to extend to the other Party the benefit
of any treatment, preference or privilege arising from any tax convention by which the
Party is bound.

Article 25.5: Cultural Industries

This Agreement does not apply to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party
with respect to a cultural industry except as specifically provided in Article 2.4 (National
Treatment and Market Access for Goods — Elimination of Customs Duties on Imports).

Article 25.6: Aboriginal Rights

This Agreement does not prevent Canada from adopting or maintaining a measure
it considers necessary to fulfil its legal obligations to Aboriginal peoples, including those
recognised and affirmed by section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, or those set out in
self-government agreements between central or regional levels of government and
Aboriginal peoples.

Article 25.7: World Trade organisation Waivers

To the extent that there is an overlapping right or obligation in this Agreement
and the WTO Agreement, a measure adopted by a Party in conformity with a waiver
decision adopted by the WTO pursuant to Article [X:3 of the WTO Agreement, is
deemed to be also in conformity with this Agreement.

Section B: General Provisions

Article 25.8: Disclosure of Information and Confidentiality

1. This Agreement does not require a Party to furnish or allow access to information,
the disclosure of which would be contrary to its law, would impede law enforcement, or
otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or which would prejudice the legitimate
commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.

> The Parties understand that this paragraph must be interpreted by reference to the footnote to Article XIV(d) of GATS
as 1f that Article was not restricted to services or direct taxes.

25-5

2. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, if a Party provides information to
the other Party in accordance with this Agreement and designates the information as
confidential, the Party receiving the information shall maintain the confidentiality of the
information.

25-6

CHAPTER 26

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 26.1: Annexes, Appendices, and Footnotes

The annexes, appendices, and footnotes to this Agreement constitute integral parts
of this Agreement.

Article 26.2: Amendments

The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. An amendment shall
enter into force after the Parties exchange written notifications certifying that they have
completed their respective applicable legal requirements and procedures for the entry into
force of the amendment, on the date agreed to by the Parties.

Article 26.3: Entry into Force

Each Party shall notify the other Party, in writing through diplomatic channels,
once it has completed the internal procedures required for the entry into force of this
Agreement. This Agreement enters into force on the first day of the second month
following the latter notification.

Article 26.4: Review

Without prejudice to any obligation to review specific provisions of this
Agreement, the Parties undertake to review this Agreement and its implementation within
five years of its entry into force and periodically thereafter as the Parties may decide.
Reviews will take into consideration relevant developments in international trade
relations, including the WTO framework, and examine the possibility of further
developing and expanding commitments under this Agreement.

Article 26.5: Accession

A non-Party may accede to this Agreement subject to the terms and conditions as
may be agreed to between the Parties and the non-Party.

Article 26.6: Duration and Termination

1. This Agreement shall remain in force unless either Party provides a written
notification to the other Party of its intention to terminate this Agreement. This
Agreement shall terminate six months after the date of that notification.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, in the event that this Agreement is terminated, the
provisions of Chapter 13 (Investment) shall continue to apply for a period of 10 years
after the date of termination of this Agreement in respect of investments or commitments
to invest made before that date.

26-1

Article 26.7: Authentic Texts

The English, French, and Indonesian texts of this Agreement are equally
authentic.

26-2