
RECOGNising their longstanding and strong friendship and the need to
strengthen their close economic relations and their shared regional interests
and ties;

CONVINCED that a free trade area will create an expanded and secure
market for goods and services in their territories and a conducive environment
for investment, thus contributing to the harmonious development and
expansion of world trade;

DESIRING to promote economic growth and create new employment
opportunities;

SEEKING to reduce or eliminate the barriers to trade and investment between
them, and to facilitate cooperation and utilisation of the greater business
opportunities provided by this Agreement;

PROMOTING a predictable, transparent, and consistent business
environment that will assist enterprises in planning effectively and using
resources efficiently;

RESOLVING to strengthen their economic, trade, and investment relations to
contribute to the objectives of sustainable development and to promote trade
and investment under this Agreement;

BUILDING on their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organisation and other multilateral,
regional, and bilateral agreements to which both Parties are party; and

REAFFIRMING their desire to build upon their commitments under the
Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation among the
Governments of Republic of Korea and the Member Countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and other relevant agreements
pursuant to the Framework Agreement;

HAVE AGREED as follows:

CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1.1: General Definitions
For purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified,
Agreement means this Agreement;

Agreement on Agriculture means the Agreement on Agriculture, in Annex
1A to the WTO Agreement;

Anti-Dumping Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of
Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, in Annex 1A
to the WTO Agreement;

Korea-ASEAN FTA means the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive
Economic Cooperation among the Governments of Republic of Korea and the
Member Countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and other
relevant agreements stipulated in paragraph | of Article 1.4 of the Framework
Agreement;

customs authority means the authority that, in accordance with the laws and
regulations of each Party, is responsible for the administration and
enforcement of its customs laws and regulations:

(a) for Korea, the Ministry of Economy and Finance, or the
Korea Customs Service; and

(b) for Indonesia, the Directorate General of Customs and
Excise of the Ministry of Finance;

or their respective successors;

customs duty means any customs or import duty or charge of any kind,
including any form of surtax or surcharge, imposed in connection with the
importation of a good, but does not include any:

(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with
Article III:2 of GATT 1994, in respect of like, directly
competitive, or substitutable goods of a Party, or in respect of
goods from which the imported good has been manufactured
or produced in whole or in part;

(b) duty imposed pursuant to a Party’s laws and regulations
consistent with Chapter Five (Trade Remedies);

(c) fee or other charge in connection with importation
commensurate with the cost of services rendered;

(d) premiums offered or collected on an imported good arising
out of any tendering system in respect of the administration
of quantitative import restrictions or tariff rate quotas; or

(e) duty imposed pursuant to any agricultural safeguard measure
taken under the WTO Agreement on Agriculture;

customs laws and regulations means such laws and regulations administered
and enforced by the customs authorities of the Parties concerning the
importation, exportation, transit or transshipment of goods, as they relate to
customs duties, charges, and other taxes, or to prohibitions, restrictions, and
other similar controls with respect to the movement of controlled items across
the boundary of the customs territory of each Party;

customs procedures means the treatment applied by the customs authority of
a Party to goods and means of transport that are subject to customs control.

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of
Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, in Annex 1A
to the WTO Agreement;

days means calendar days including weekends and holidays;

enterprise means any entity duly constituted or otherwise organised under the
applicable laws and regulations, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether
privately or governmentally owned or controlled, including any corporation,
trust, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, association, or similar
organisation;

existing means in effect on the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

GATS means the General Agreement on Trade in Services, in Annex 1B to
the WTO Agreement;

GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994,
including its notes and supplementary provisions, in Annex 1A to the WTO

Agreement;

goods means any merchandise, product, article, or material;

Harmonised System (HS) means the nomenclature of the Harmonised
Commodity Description and Coding System defined in the International
Convention on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System,
including all legal notes thereto, as in force and as amended from time to time;

Joint Committee means the Joint Committee established under Article
12.1(Establishment of Joint Committee);

juridical person means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise
organised under the applicable laws and regulations, whether for profit or
otherwise, and whether privately-owned or governmentally-owned, including
any corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship or
association;

measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law,
regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action or any other form;

measures adopted or maintained by a Party means measures adopted or
maintained by:

(a) central or local governments and authorities; and

(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated
by central or local governments and authorities;

national means:

(a) for Korea, a Korean national within the meaning of the
Nationality Act, as amended; and

(b) for Indonesia, an Indonesian national as defined in the
Indonesia Law No. 12/2006, as amended from time to time,

or any successor legislation;

originating goods means products or materials that qualify as originating
under the Chapter Three (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures);

person means a natural or juridical person or an enterprise;

preferential tariff treatment means tariff concessions granted to originating
goods as reflected by the tariff rates applicable under this Agreement;

Safeguards Agreement means the Agreement on Safeguards, in Annex 1A to
the WTO Agreement;

SCM Agreement means the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing
Measures, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

territory means:

(a)

(b)

for Korea, the land, maritime, and airspace under its
sovereignty, and those maritime areas, including the seabed
and subsoil adjacent to and beyond the outer limit of the
territorial seas over which it may exercise sovereign rights or
jurisdiction in accordance with international law and _ its
domestic law; and

for Indonesia, the land territories, internal waters,
archipelagic waters, territorial sea, including the seabed and
subsoil thereof, and airspace over such territories and waters,
as well as the continental shelf and exclusive economic zone,
over which Indonesia has sovereignty, sovereign rights or
jurisdiction as defined in its laws, and in accordance with
international law, including the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, done at Montego Bay, December 10,
1982;

TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights, in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement;

UNCITRAL means the United Nations Commission on International Trade

Law;

WTO means the World Trade Organisation; and

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World
Trade Organisation, done on 15 April 1994.

Article 1.2: Establishment of a Free Trade Area

Consistent with Article XXIV of GATT 1994 and Article V of GATS, the
Parties hereby establish a free trade area, in accordance with the provisions of

this Agreement.

Article 1.3: Objectives

The objectives of this Agreement are to:

(a) achieve the substantial liberalisation of trade in goods
between the Parties, in conformity with Article XXIV of

GATT 1994;

(b) achieve the substantial liberalisation of trade in services
between the Parties, in conformity with Article V of
GATS;

(c) achieve the substantial increase of investment

opportunities in the territories of the Parties;

(d) promote fair competition in their economies, particularly
as it relates to economic relations between the Parties;

(e) establish a framework for cooperation and capacity
building with a view to promoting the effective and
efficient implementation and utilisation of this Agreement,
thereby fostering competitiveness and _ sustainable
development; and

(f) develop international trade in such a way as to contribute
to the objective of sustainable development as it is
integrated and reflected in trade relations between the
Parties.

Article 1.4: Relation to Other Agreements

1. The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under existing
agreements to which both Parties are party, including the WTO Agreement
and the Korea-ASEAN FTA.

2. For greater certainty, this Agreement shall not be construed to
derogate from any international legal obligation between the Parties that
provides for more favourable treatment of goods, services, investments, or
persons than that provided for under this Agreement.

3. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, in the event of any
inconsistency between this Agreement and any other agreement to which both
Parties are party, the Parties shall, upon request, consult with each other with a
view to finding a mutually satisfactory solution.

CHAPTER 2
NATIONAL TREATMENT AND MARKET ACCESS FOR GOODS

Article 2.1: Scope and Coverage
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter applies
to trade in goods between the Parties.

Section A: Definitions

Article 2.2: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:

consular transactions means requirements that goods of a Party intended for
export to the territory of the other Party must first be submitted to the
supervision of the consul of the importing Party in the territory of the
exporting Party for purposes of obtaining consular invoices or consular visas
for commercial invoices, certificates of origin, manifests, shippers’ export
declarations, or any other customs documentation required on or in connection
with importation;

duty-free means free of customs duty; and
import licensing means an administrative procedure requiring the submission
of an application or other documentation (other than that generally required for

customs clearance purposes) to the relevant administrative body as a prior
condition for importation into the territory of the importing Party.

Section B: National Treatment
Article 2.3: National Treatment
Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other
Party in accordance with Article III of GATT 1994. To this end, the provisions

of Article HI of GATT 1994 shall be incorporated into and form an integral
part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Section C: Tariff Reduction or Elimination

2-1

Article 2.4: Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall
increase any existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty, on an
originating good.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall
gradually reduce or eliminate its customs duties on originating goods in
accordance with its Schedule in Annex 2-A.

3. On the request of either Party, the Parties shall consult to consider
accelerating the reduction or elimination of customs duties set out in their
Schedules in Annex 2-A. An agreement by the Parties to accelerate the
reduction or elimination of a customs duty on an originating good shall
supersede any duty rate or staging category determined pursuant to their
Schedules in Annex 2-A for that good when approved by each Party in
accordance with its applicable legal procedures.

4. A Party may unilaterally accelerate the reduction or elimination of
customs duties set out in its Schedule in Annex 2-A at any time if it so wishes.
The Party shall notify the other Party through a diplomatic note immediately
after completion of the internal procedures required for the amendments to
enter into force.

5. In accordance with the WTO Agreement, originating goods of the
other Party shall be eligible, at the time of importation, for the most-favoured-
nation (hereinafter referred to as “MFN’’) applied rate of customs duty for
those goods in a Party, where that rate is lower than the rate of customs duty
provided for in that Party’s Schedule in Annex 2-A. Each Party shall make
publicly available any amendments to the MEN rate on the internet.

6. For greater certainty, a Party may:

(a) raise a customs duty to the level established in its Schedule in
Annex 2-A following a unilateral reduction or elimination; or

(b) maintain or increase a customs duty as authorised by the
Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO.
Article 2.5: Customs Valuation

For purposes of determining the customs value of goods traded

between the Parties, the provisions of Article VI of GATT 1994, and the
provisions of Part I and the Interpretative Notes of Annex I of the Customs

2-2

Valuation Agreement shall apply, mutatis mutandis.

Section D: Special Regimes

Article 2.6: Temporary Admission of Goods

l. Each Party shall allow, as provided for in its laws and regulations,
goods to be brought into its customs territory conditionally relieved, totally or
partially, from payment of customs duties and taxes if such goods are brought
into its customs territory for a specific purpose, are intended for re-exportation
within a specific period, and have not undergone any change except normal
depreciation and wastage due to the use made of them.

2. Each Party shall, at the request of the person concerned and for
reasons its customs authority considers valid, extend the time limit for
temporary admission provided for in paragraph 1 beyond the period initially
fixed.

3. Neither Party shall condition the temporary admission of a good
provided for in paragraph 1, other than to require that the good:

(a) be used solely by or under the personal supervision of a
national or resident of the other Party in the exercise of the
business activity, trade, profession, or sport of that person;

(b) not be sold or leased while in its territory;

(c) be accompanied by a security or guarantee in an amount no
greater than the customs duties, taxes, fees, and charges that
would otherwise be owed on entry or final importation,
releasable on the exportation of the good;

(d) be capable of identification when imported and exported;

(e) be exported on the departure of the person referred to in
subparagraph (a), or within such other period related to the
purpose of the temporary admission as the Party may
establish, unless extended;

(f) be admitted in no greater quantity than is reasonable for its
intended use; and

(g) be otherwise admissible into the Party’s territory under its
laws and regulations.

4. If any condition that a Party imposes under paragraph 3 has not been
fulfilled, the Party may apply the customs duty and any other charge that
would normally be owed on the good in addition to any other charges or
penalties provided for under its laws and regulations.

5. Each Party shall permit a good temporarily admitted under this Article
to be re-exported through a customs port other than that through which it was
admitted.

Article 2.7: Duty-Free Entry of Samples of No Commercial Value

Each Party shall grant duty-free entry to samples of no commercial
value, imported from the territory of the other Party subject to its laws and
regulations, regardless of their origin.

Section E: Non-Tariff Measures

Article 2.8: Application of Non-Tariff Measures

1. A Party shall not adopt or maintain any non-tariff measure on the
importation of any good of the other Party or on the exportation of any good
destined for the territory of the other Party, except in accordance with its WTO
rights and obligations or this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall ensure the transparency of its non-tariff measures
permitted in paragraph | and shall ensure that any such measures are not
prepared, adopted or applied with a view to, or with the effect of, creating
unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

Article 2.9: General Elimination of Quantitative Restrictions

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall
adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction other than duties, taxes or
other charges, whether made effective through quotas, import or export
licenses or other measures, on the importation of any good of the other Party
or on the exportation of any good destined for the territory of the other Party,
except in accordance with its rights and obligations under the relevant
provisions of the WTO Agreement. To this end, Article XI of GATT 1994 is
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. Where a Party adopts an export prohibition or restriction in

2-4

accordance with subparagraph 2(a) of Article XI of GATT 1994, the Party
shall, upon request:

(a) inform the other Party of such prohibition or restriction and
its reasons together with its nature and expected duration, or
publish such prohibition or restriction; and

(b) provide the other Party with a reasonable opportunity for
consultation with respect to matters related to such
prohibition or restriction.

Article 2.10: Technical Consultations on Non-Tariff Measures

1. A Party may request technical consultations with the other Party
(hereinafter referred to as the “requested Party’) on a measure the Party
considers to be adversely affecting its trade. The request shall be in writing
and shall clearly identify the measure and the concerns as to how the measure
adversely affects trade between the Party requesting technical consultations
(hereinafter referred to as the “requesting Party”) and the requested Party.

2. Where the measures are covered by another Chapter, its Chapter-
specific consultation mechanism shall be used, unless otherwise agreed
between the Parties.

3. Except as provided in paragraph 2, the requested Party shall respond
and enter into technical consultations within 60 days after the receipt of the
written request referred to in paragraph 1, unless otherwise determined by the
Parties, with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory solution within 180
days of the request. Technical consultations may be conducted via any means
mutually agreed by the Parties.

4. If the requesting Party considers that the matter is urgent or involves
perishable goods, it may request that technical consultations take place within
a shorter time frame than that provided for under paragraph 3. Nothing in this
paragraph shall be construed to prevent a Party from applying sanitary and
phytosanitary (hereinafter referred to as “SPS”’) measures.

5. The technical consultations under this Article shall be without
prejudice to the rights and obligations pertaining to dispute settlement
proceedings under Chapter Ten (Dispute Settlement) and the WTO Agreement.

Article 2.11: Import Licensing

1. Each Party shall ensure that all automatic and non-automatic import

2-5

licensing procedures are implemented in a transparent and predictable manner,
and applied in accordance with the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures,
in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the “Import
Licensing Agreement’). Neither Party shall adopt or maintain a measure that is
inconsistent with the Import Licensing Agreement.

2. Promptly after entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall
notify the other Party of any existing import licensing procedures. The
notification shall include the information specified in Article 5.2 of the Import
Licensing Agreement. A Party shall be deemed to be in compliance with this
paragraph if:

(a) it has notified that procedure to the WTO Committee on
Import Licensing provided for in Article 4 of the Import
Licensing Agreement together with the information specified
in Article 5.2 of the Import Licensing Agreement; and

(b) in the most recent annual submission due before the date of
entry into force of this Agreement for that Party to the WTO
Committee on Import Licensing in response to the annual
questionnaire on import licensing procedures described in
Article 7.3 of the Import Licensing Agreement, it has
provided, with respect to that procedure, the information
requested in that questionnaire.

3. Before applying any new or modified import licensing procedure, a
Party shall publish the new procedure or modification on an _ official
government internet site. To the extent possible, the Party shall do so at least
21 days before the new procedure or modification takes effect.

4. The notification required under paragraph 2 is without prejudice to
whether the import licensing procedure is consistent with this Agreement.

5. No application shall be refused for minor documentation errors which
do not alter the basic data contained therein. Minor documentation errors may
include, but are not limited to, formatting errors (for instance, the width of a
margin or the font used) and errors with spelling which are obviously made
without fraudulent intent or gross negligence.

6. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, answer within 60 days all
reasonable enquiries from the other Party with regard to the criteria employed
by its respective licensing authorities in granting or denying import licenses.
The importing Party shall publish sufficient information for the other Party
and traders to know the basis for granting or allocating import licenses.

7. If a Party denies an import license application with respect to a good

2-6

of the other Party, it shall, on the request of the applicant and within a
reasonable period after receiving the request provide the applicant with an
explanation of the reason for the denial.

Article 2.12: Fees and Formalities Connected with Importation and
Exportation

l. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VIII:1 of GATT
1994 that all fees and charges of whatever character (other than import or
export duties, charges equivalent to an internal tax or other internal charge
applied consistently with Article II:2 of GATT 1994, and antidumping and
countervailing duties) imposed on or in connection with importation or
exportation are limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered
and do not represent an indirect protection to domestic goods or a taxation on
imports or exports for fiscal purposes.

2. Each Party shall promptly publish details of the fees and charges that
it imposes on or in connection with importation or exportation and shall make
such information available on the internet.

3. Neither Party shall require consular transactions, including related
fees and charges, in connection with the importation of a good of the other
Party. Neither Party shall require that any customs documentation supplied in
connection with the importation of any good of the other Party be endorsed,
certified or otherwise sighted or approved by the importing Party’s overseas
representatives, or persons or entities with authority to act on the importing
Party’s behalf, nor impose any related fees or charges.

Article 2.13: Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The Parties reaffirm their existing rights and obligations with respect
to each other under the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement taking into
account relevant decisions of the WTO Committee on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures and international standards, guidelines and
recommendations.

2. The Parties shall encourage technical cooperation and communication
in the field of SPS issues subject to the availability of appropriate resources.

3. Chapter Ten (Dispute Settlement) shall not be applied to any SPS
matter arising under this section.

Article 2.14: Technical Barriers to Trade

1. The Parties reaffirm their existing rights and obligations with respect
to each other under the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, in Annex
1A to the WTO Agreement.

2. The Parties shall strengthen their cooperation in the fields of standards,
technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures with a view to
increasing the mutual understanding of their respective systems and
facilitating access to their respective markets. The Parties will seek to identify,
develop, and promote trade facilitating initiatives regarding standards,
technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures that are
appropriate for particular issues or sectors as agreed upon by the Parties on the
mutually determined terms and conditions.

Section F: Institutional Provisions

Article 2.15: Committee on Trade in Goods

1. For purposes of the effective implementation and operation of this
Chapter and Chapter Five (Trade Remedies), the function of the Committee on
Trade in Goods (hereinafter referred to in this Article as the “Committee’’)
established in accordance with Article 12.4 (Committees and Subsidiary
Bodies) shall include:

(a) reviewing and monitoring the implementation and operation
of this Chapter and Chapter Five (Trade Remedies) and, if
appropriate, making a report and recommendation;

(b) promoting trade in goods between the Parties, including
through consultations on accelerating reduction or elimination
of customs duties under this Agreement and other issues as
appropriate;

(c) addressing barriers to trade in goods between the Parties,
especially those related to the application of non-tariff
measures, and, if appropriate, referring such matters to the
Joint Committee for its consideration;

(d) addressing any issues related to measures to update each
Party’s Schedule of tariff concessions to reflect amendments
of the Harmonised System, including the transposition of the
Parties’ Schedules of tariff concessions and exchanging
transposed Schedules of tariff concessions and correlation

2-8

tables in a timely manner; and

(e) discussing any matter arising under this Chapter and Chapter
Five (Trade Remedies) as agreed.

2. The Committee shall meet on the request of a Party or the Joint

Committee to consider matters arising under this Chapter and Chapter Five
(Trade Remedies).

2-9

CHAPTER 3
RULES OF ORIGIN AND ORIGIN PROCEDURES

Section A: Rules of Origin

Article 3.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:

CIF means the value of the good imported, and includes the cost of freight and
insurance up to the port or place of entry into the country of importation. The
valuation shall be made in accordance with Article VU of GATT 1994 and
Customs Valuation Agreement;

exporter means a natural or juridical person located in an exporting Party
from where a good is exported by such a person;

FOB means the free-on-board value of a good, inclusive of the cost of
transport from the producer to the port or site of final shipment abroad. The
valuation shall be made in accordance with Article VU of GATT 1994 and
Customs Valuation Agreement;

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles means the recognised consensus
or substantial authoritative support in the territory of a Party with respect to
the recording of revenues, expenses, costs, assets, and liabilities, the disclosure
of information, and the preparation of financial statement. Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles may encompass broad guidelines for general
application, as well as detailed standards, practices and procedures;

identical and interchangeable goods or materials means goods or materials
being of the same kind and commercial quality, possessing the same technical
and physical characteristics, and which once they are incorporated into the
finished good cannot be distinguished from one another for origin purposes by
virtue of any markings, etc.;

importer means a natural or juridical person located in the territory of a Party
from where a good is imported by such a person;

materials shall include ingredients, raw materials, parts, components, sub-
assemblies used in the production process;

non-originating goods means products or materials that do not qualify as
originating under this Chapter;

3-1

packing materials and containers for transportation means the goods used
to protect a good during its transportation, different from those materials or
containers used for its retail sale;

producer means a natural or juridical person who carries out production in the
territory of a Party;

Product Specific Rules means the rules that specify that the materials have
undergone a change in tariff classification or a specific manufacturing or
processing operation, or satisfy a regional value content/qualifying value
content! or a combination of any of these criteria; and

production means methods of obtaining a good including growing, mining,
harvesting, raising, breeding, extracting, gathering, collecting, capturing,
fishing, trapping, hunting, manufacturing, processing or assembling a good.

Article 3.2: Origin Criteria

1. For purposes of this Agreement, a good imported into the territory of
a Party shall be deemed to be originating and eligible for preferential tariff
treatment if it conforms to the origin requirements under any one of the
following:

(a) a good which is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the
territory of the exporting Party as set out and defined in
Article 3.3;

(b) a good which is produced entirely in the territory of the

exporting Party exclusively from originating materials; or

(c) a good which is produced entirely in the territory of the
exporting Party using non-originating materials, provided the
good satisfies the applicable requirements set out in Annex
3-A.

2. Except as provided for in Article 3.6, the conditions for acquiring
originating status set out in this Chapter must be fulfilled without interruption
in the territory of the exporting Party.

' Regional value content (hereinafter referred to as "RVC") and qualifying value content
(hereinafter referred to as "QVC") bear the same meaning and are fully interchangeable. For
greater certainty, RVC is a percentage that indicates to what extent a good is produced in
Korea or Indonesia.

3-2

Article 3.3: Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

Within the meaning of Article 3.2.1(a), the following shall be considered to be
wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of a Party:

(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Qj)

plants and plant products grown and harvested there;
live animals born and raised there;

goods obtained from live animals referred to in subparagraph

(b);

goods obtained by hunting or trapping within the land
territory, or fishing or aquaculture conducted within the
internal waters or within the territorial sea of a Party;

minerals and other naturally occurring substances, not
included in subparagraphs (a) through (d), extracted or taken
from the territory of a Party;

goods of sea-fishing and other marine life taken from the sea,

seabed, or subsoil outside the territorial sea of a Party by
vessels registered with a Party and flying its flag, provided
that Party has rights to exploit such sea, seabed, or subsoil in
accordance with the international law’;

goods produced or made on board factory ships registered
with a Party and entitled to fly its flag, exclusively from
products referred to in subparagraph (f);

goods taken by a Party or a person of a Party from the
seabed or subsoil outside the territory of a Party, provided
that Party has rights to exploit such seabed or subsoil in
accordance with the international law;

goods taken from outer space provided that they are obtained
by the Party or a person of that Party;

articles collected from there which can no longer perform
their original purpose nor are capable of being restored or
repaired and are fit only for the disposal or recovery of parts
or raw materials, or for recycling purposes;

*> “The international law” refers to generally accepted international law such as the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

(k)

(I)

waste and scrap derived from:
(i) production there; or

(ii) used goods collected there, provided that such
goods are fit only for the recovery of raw materials;
and

goods obtained or produced in the territory of the Party
solely from goods referred to in subparagraphs (a) through

(k).

Article 3.4: Calculation of Regional/Qualifying Value Content

For purpose of Article 3.2.1(c), the Parties shall provide that the importer,
exporter, or producer may calculate regional/qualifying value content based on
one or the other of the following methods:

(a)

(b)

Build-Up Method

VOM
RVC or QVC = wnnneeennnecccnnnennens x 100%
FOB

VOM means value of originating materials, which includes
the value of originating materials, direct labour cost, direct
overhead cost, transportation cost and profit.

Build-Down Method

FOB - VNM
RVC or QVC= ------------------------ x 100%
FOB

VNM means value of non-originating materials, which shall
be: (i) the CIF value at the time of importation of the
materials, parts or goods; or (11) the earliest ascertained price
paid for the materials, parts or goods of undetermined origin
in the territory of the Party where the working or processing
has taken place.

3-4

Article 3.5: Treatment for Certain Goods

1. Treatment for Certain Goods shall be governed by Rule 6 of Annex 3
to the Agreement on Trade in Goods under the Framework Agreement on
Comprehensive Economic Cooperation among the Governments of the
Republic of Korea and the Member Countries of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, and the Exchange of Notes between the Republic of Korea and
the ASEAN Member Countries regarding the Implementation and Monitoring
of Rule 6 dated 27 February 2009 (hereinafter referred to as “Exchange of
Notes’), which are hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.

2. The list of goods subject to treatment under paragraph 1 shall be the
list of goods attached to the Exchange of Notes referred to in paragraph 1. The
Parties shall revise or amend the aforementioned list of goods through a
further exchange of notes within one year from the date of entry into force of
this Agreement, unless otherwise agreed.

Article 3.6: Accumulation

Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, a good originating in the
territory of a Party, which is used in the territory of the other Party as material
for a finished good eligible for preferential tariff treatment, shall be considered
to be originating in the territory of the latter Party where working or
processing of the finished good has taken place.

Article 3.7: Non-Qualifying Operations

1. Notwithstanding any provisions in this Chapter, a good shall not be
considered to be originating in the territory of a Party if the following
operations are undertaken exclusively by itself or in combination in the
territory of that Party:

(a) preserving operations to ensure that the good remains in
good condition during transport and storage;

(b) changes of packaging, breaking-up and assembly of
packages;

(c) simple“ washing, cleaning, removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint

*->:© "simple" generally describes an activity which does not need special skills, machines,

apparatus or equipment especially produced or installed for carrying out the activity.
7 “simple mixing” generally describes an activity which does not need special skills, machines,
apparatus or equipment especially produced or installed for carrying out the activity.

3-5

or other coverings;
(d) ironing or pressing of textiles;
(e) simple” painting and polishing operations;

(f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing and glazing of
cereals and rice;

(g) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps;

(h) simple® peeling, stoning, or un-shelling;

(1) sharpening, simple grinding, or simple cutting;

(j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching;

(k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes,
fixing on cards or boards and all other simple packaging
operations;

(1) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like

distinguishing signs on products or their packaging;
(m) simple mixing’ of products, whether or not of different kinds;

(n) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete
article or disassembly of products into parts;

(0) simple® testing or calibrations; or
(p) slaughtering of animals’.
2. A good originating in the territory of a Party shall retain its initial

originating status, when exported from the other Party, where operations
undertaken have not gone beyond those referred to in paragraph 1.

However, “simple mixing” does not include chemical reaction. Chemical reaction means a
process (including a biochemical process) which result in a molecule with a new structure by
breaking intramolecular bonds and by forming new intramolecular bonds, or by altering the
spatial arrangement of atoms in a molecule.

* "simple" generally describes an activity which does not need special skills, machines,
apparatus or equipment especially produced or installed for carrying out the activity.

” “Slaughtering” means the mere killing of animals and subsequent processes such as cutting,
chilling or freezing, for purposes of preservation for storage and transport.

3-6

Article 3.8: Intermediate Goods?”

1. When an originating good is used in the subsequent production of
another good, no account shall be taken of the non-originating materials
contained in the originating good for purposes of determining the originating
status of the subsequently produced good.

2. When a non-originating good is used in the subsequent production of
another good:

(a) for purposes of calculating the value of the non-originating
materials of the subsequently produced good, an account
shall be taken only of the non-originating materials
contained in the non-originating good; and

(b) for purposes of calculating the value of the originating
materials of the subsequently produced good, an account
shall be taken of the originating materials contained in the
non-originating good.

Article 3.9: Direct Consignment
1. Preferential tariff treatment shall be applied to a good satisfying the
requirements of this Chapter and which is transported directly between the
territories of the exporting Party and the importing Party.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a good of which transport involves
transit through one or more intermediate third countries, other than the
territories of the exporting Party and the importing Party, shall be considered
to be consigned directly, provided that:

(a) the transit is justified for geographical reason or by
consideration related exclusively to transport requirement;

(b) the good has not entered into trade or consumption there; and
(c) the good has not undergone any operation other than
unloading and reloading or any operation required to keep it
in good condition.
3. For purposes of implementing paragraph 2, where transportation is

effected through the territory of one or more intermediate countries, other than

'° For greater certainty, this Article applies only to production processes within a Party.

3-7

that of the both Parties, the following shall be produced to the relevant
government authorities of the importing Party:

(a)

(b)

a through Bill of Lading issued in the territory of the
exporting Party, which includes combination of any transport
documents covering the entire transport route of a good from
the exporting Party to the importing Party; or

other relevant supporting documents, if any, as evidence that
the requirements of paragraph 2 are being complied with.

Article 3.10: De Minimis

1. A good that does not satisfy an applicable change in tariff
classification requirement set out in Annex 3-A shall be considered as

originating if:

(a)

(b)

for a good, other than that provided for in Chapters 50
through 63 of the Harmonised System, the value of all non-
originating materials used in its production that do not
undergo the required change in tariff classification does not
exceed 10 percent of the FOB value of the good;

for a good provided for in Chapters 50 through 63 of the
Harmonised System, the weight of all non-originating
materials used in its production that do not undergo the
required change in tariff classification does not exceed 10
percent of the total weight of the good;

and the good specified in subparagraphs (a) and (b) meets all other applicable
criteria set forth in this Chapter for qualifying as an originating good.

2. The value of non-originating materials referred to in paragraph 1 shall,
however, be included in the value of non-originating materials for any
applicable RVC/QVC requirement for the good.

3-8

Article 3.11: Treatment of Packaging and Packing Materials

1. (a) If a good is subject to the RVC/QVC criterion, the value of
the packaging and packing materials for retail sale shall be
taken into account in its determination of origin, where the
packaging and packing materials are considered to be
forming a whole with the good.

(b) Where subparagraph (a) is not applicable, the packaging and
packing materials for retail sale, if classified together with
the packaged good, shall be disregarded in determining
whether all the non-originating materials used in the
production of the good fulfil criterion corresponding to a
change in tariff classification of the said good.

2. Packing materials and containers for transportation of a good shall not
be taken into account in determining the origin of the good.

Article 3.12: Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools

1. The Parties shall provide that a good’s standard accessories, spare
parts, or tools delivered with the good shall be considered originating goods if
the good is an originating good and shall be disregarded in determining
whether all the non-originating materials used in the production of the good
satisfy the applicable change in tariff classification requirement set out in
Annex 3-A, provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, or tools are classified with and
not invoiced separately from the good; and

(b) the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts, or
tools are customary for the good.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if a good is subject to a RVC/QVC
requirement, the value of the accessories, spare parts, or tools described in
paragraph 1 shall be taken into account as originating or non-originating
materials as the case may be, in calculating the RVC/QVC of the good.

3-9

Article 3.13: Neutral Elements

In order to determine whether a good originates, it shall not be necessary to
determine the origin of the following which might be used in its production
and not incorporated into the good:

(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

fuel and energy;
tools, dies and moulds;

Spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of
equipment and buildings;

lubricants, greases, compounding materials and _ other
materials used in production or used to operate equipment and
buildings;

gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and
supplies;

equipment, devices and supplies used for testing or inspecting
the good; and

any other goods that are not incorporated into the good but of
which use in the production of the good can reasonably be
demonstrated to be a part of that production.

Article 3.14: Identical and Interchangeable Goods or Materials

1. Whether identical and interchangeable goods or materials are
originating can be determined by:

(a) physical segregation of each good or material; or
(b) generally accepted accounting principles of inventory
management practiced in the territory of the exporting Party.
2. Once a decision has been taken on the inventory management method,

that method shall be used throughout the fiscal year.

Section B: Origin Procedures

Article 3.15: Proof of Origin
1. Goods originating in a Party shall, on importation into the other Party,
benefit from preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement on the basis of
a Proof of Origin.
2. Any of the following shall be considered as a Proof of Origin:

(a) a Certificate of Origin issued by an issuing body referred to
in Article 3.16;

(b) an Origin Declaration made out by an approved exporter;
and
(c) an Origin Declaration by an exporter or producer.
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating goods within the meaning

of this Chapter, in the cases specified in Article 3.19 may benefit from
preferential tariff treatment without any of the documents referred to in
paragraph 2.

4. Both Parties shall implement the Origin Declaration by exporter or
producer referred to in paragraph 2(c) within 10 years after the date of entry
into force of this Agreement.

5. Notwithstanding paragraph 4, a Party may elect to seek a longer
extension period, up to a maximum of 10 years in which to implement the
provision.

6. The Parties may implement the Proof of Origin referred to in
paragraph 2(b) and 2(c) after both Parties conclude negotiations on regulations
and formats through the Committee on Customs and Trade Facilitation
referred to in Article 4.12 (Committee on Customs and Trade Facilitation)
within two years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, unless
otherwise agreed by the Parties.

7. Paragraph 6 shall apply only after the exporting Party has notified the
importing Party, that it shall implement this paragraph.

8. Each Party shall provide that a Proof of Origin remains valid for one
year from the date on which it is issued or made out.

Article 3.16: Certificate of Origin''

1. A Certificate of Origin shall be issued by issuing bodies of the
exporting Party in accordance with its domestic laws and regulations, on
application by the producer or exporter or, under his responsibility, by his
authorised representative.

2. For purposes of this Agreement, a Certificate of Origin is any of:

(a) a certificate of origin in paper format; or

(b) an electronic certificate of origin.

3. A Certificate of Origin in paper format shall:

(a) be on A4 size paper and be in the attached Form set out in
Annex 3-B-1. For multiple items declaration, the Parties may
use the attached Form set out in Annex 3-B-2 as additional
pages to the Certificate of Origin;

(b) comprise one original and two copies. The original shall be
forwarded by the producer or exporter to the importer for
submission to the customs authority of the importing Party.
The duplicate shall be retained by the issuing body of the
exporting Party. The triplicate shall be retained by the
producer or exporter;

(c) be completed in English and may cover one or more goods
under one consignment; and

(d) be in a printed format’? or such other medium including
electronic format.

4. An Electronic Certificate of Origin means a Certificate of Origin data

that is transmitted electronically between Korea and Indonesia through
Electronic Origin Data Exchange System referred to in Article 3.25.

'' Tf all the information of a Certificate of Origin is exchanged between the customs authority
of each Party in accordance with Article 3.25, the customs authority of each Party may not
require the importer to submit the Certificate of Origin on importation. Nevertheless, the
customs authority of each Party reserves the right to require the importer to submit the
Certificate of Origin, when it deems necessary. This footnote shall be without prejudice to any
other requirements under this Chapter.

12 &

a printed format” means a Certificate of Origin manually or electronically signed, stamped,

and issued in the exporting Party directly from the issuing body system and printed by issuing
body, producer or exporter, or his authorised representative.

3-12

5. A Certificate of Origin shall be issued prior to or at the time of
shipment, or within seven calendar days’? after the date of shipment. In
exceptional cases where a Certificate of Origin has not been issued prior to or
at the time of shipment, or within seven calendar days after shipment due to
involuntary errors, omissions, or other valid causes, a Certificate of Origin
may be issued retroactively but within one year from the date of shipment,
bearing the words “ISSUED RETROACTIVELY.”

6. The exporter applying for the issuance of a Certificate of Origin shall
be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the issuing body of the
exporting Party issuing the Certificate of Origin, all appropriate documents
proving the originating status of the products concerned including statements
from the suppliers or producers in accordance with its domestic laws and
regulations as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter.

7. In the event of theft, loss, or destruction of a Certificate of Origin, the
producer or exporter or his authorised representatives may apply to the issuing
bodies of the exporting Party for issuing a certified true copy, provided that the
original copy previously issued has been verified not to be used. This copy
shall bear the words “CERTIFIED TRUE COPY” in box 4 in Annex 3-B-1.
This copy shall bear the date of issuance of the original Certificate of Origin in
box 12 in Annex 3-B-1. The certified true copy of a Certificate of Origin shall
be issued within one year from the date of issuance of the original Certificate
of Origin.

8. Neither erasures nor superimpositions shall be allowed on a
Certificate of Origin. Any alteration shall be made by striking out the
erroneous materials and making any addition required. Such alterations shall
be certified by the issuing body. Unused spaces shall be crossed out to prevent
any subsequent addition. Alternatively, a new Certificate of Origin may be
issued to replace the erroneous Certificate of Origin. The issuing body shall
specify the date of issuance of the originally issued Certificate of Origin in the
new Certificate of Origin.

' For greater certainty, “seven calendar days” shall include the date of shipment itself.

Article 3.17: Issuing Body

1. Each Party shall maintain an updated register of the names and seals
of its issuing bodies.

2. Each Party shall notify the other Party of the names and specimen
signatures and specimen of official seals of its issuing bodies through the
contact point. Any changes in the said list shall be promptly provided in the
same manner.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party shall not be required to provide
the specimen signatures of its issuing body to the other Party, provided that it
has established a secured website containing key information of a Certificate
of Origin issued by the exporting Party, namely reference number, HS code,
description of the goods, quantity, date of issuance, and name of the exporter.

4. The issuing bodies shall, to the best of their competence and ability,
carry out proper examination, in accordance with the domestic laws and
regulations of the Party, upon each application for a Certificate of Origin to
ensure that:

(a) the Certificate of Origin is duly completed and signed by the
authorised signatory;

(b) the origin of the good is in conformity with this Chapter;

(c) other statements in the Certificate of Origin correspond to
supporting documentary evidence submitted;

(d) the description, quantity, and weight of the good, number
and type of packages, as specified, conform to the good to be
exported; and

(e) the Certificates of Origin issued are numbered consecutively.

Article 3.18: Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment

l. Each Party shall provide that an importer may at the time of
importation, make a claim for preferential tariff treatment based on a Proof of
Origin.

2. Each Party may require, in accordance with its domestic laws and
regulations, that an importer who claims preferential tariff treatment for a good
imported into its territory:

(a)

make written statement in the customs declaration that the
good is an originating good;

(b) identify the applicable tariff rate;

(c) have in its possession at the time the declaration referred to
in subparagraph (a) is made, a written or electronic Proof of
Origin as described in Article 3.15;

(d) provide a Proof of Origin to the customs authority of the
importing Party; and

(e) when the importer has reason to believe that the declaration
in subparagraph (a) is based on inaccurate information,
correct the importation document and pay any customs duty
Owing in accordance with its domestic laws and regulations.

3. Each Party shall provide that a Proof of Origin shall be valid for one

year after the date it was issued.

4. Each Party, subject to its laws and regulations, shall provide that
where a good would have qualified as an originating good when it was
imported into the territory of that Party, the importer of the good may, within a
period specified by the laws and regulations of the importing Party, after the
date on which the good was imported, apply for a refund of any excess duties,
deposit, or guarantee paid as a result of the good not having been accorded
preferential tariff treatment, on presentation of the following to the customs
authority of the importing Party:

(a) a Proof of Origin and other evidence that the good qualifies
as an originating good; and
(b) such other documentation in relation to the importation as
the customs authority may require to satisfactorily evidence
the tariff preference claimed.
5. Notwithstanding paragraph 4, each Party may require, in accordance

with its domestic laws and regulations, that the importer notify to the customs
authority of the importing Party its intention to claim preferential tariff
treatment at the time of importation.

Article 3.19: Waiver of Proof of Origin

1. Each Party shall provide that a Proof of Origin shall not be required
where:

(a) the customs value of the importation does not exceed
US$200 FOB or the equivalent amount in the currency of the
importing Party, or such higher amount as may be
established by the importing Party, unless the importing
Party considers the importation to be part of a series of
importations carried out or planned for purposes of evading
compliance with the Party’s laws and regulations governing
claims for preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement;
or

(b) it is a good for which the importing Party does not require
the importer to present a Proof of Origin.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the importing Party may require the
importer to submit a Proof of Origin and such other documentation related to
the origin of the good where there is doubt as to the veracity of the originating
status of the good.

Article 3.20: Record Keeping Requirements

1. Each Party shall provide that an exporter or producer of the good
covered by a Proof of Origin shall maintain, for a minimum of three years
from the date the Proof of Origin was issued, all records necessary to
demonstrate that the good covered by the Proof of Origin was an originating
good, including records concerning:

(a) the purchase of, cost of, value of, and payment for, the
exported good;
(b) the purchase of, cost of, value of, and payment for all

materials, including neutral elements, used in the production
of the exported good;

(c) the production of the good in the form in which it was
exported; and

(d) such other documentation as required by the laws and
regulations of the exporting Party.

2. Each Party shall provide that an importer claiming preferential tariff
treatment for a good imported into the territory of the Party based on a Proof
of Origin shall maintain, for a minimum of three years from the date of
importation of the good, documentation related to importation.

3. Each Party shall provide that the issuing bodies as referred to in
Article 3.17 shall maintain, for a minimum of three years from the date that a
Certificate of Origin was issued, a copy of the Certificate of Origin as well as
the supporting information required for certification.

4. Each Party shall provide that an exporter, producer, importer, or
issuing bodies may choose to maintain the records specified in paragraphs 1
through 3 in any medium that allows for prompt retrieval, including, but not
limited to, digital, electronic, optical, magnetic, or written form.

Article 3.21: Discrepancies and Formal Errors

1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in
a Proof of Origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs
authority of the importing Party for purpose of carrying out the formalities for
importing the goods shall not ipso facto render the Proof of Origin null and
void if it is duly established that such documents do correspond to the goods
imported.

2. Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a Proof of Origin
should not cause this document to be rejected if these errors are not such as to
create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements made in this
document.

3. For multiple items declared under the same Proof of Origin, a
problem encountered with one of the items listed shall not affect or delay the
granting of preferential tariff treatment and customs clearance of the remaining
items listed in that Proof of Origin.

Article 3.22: Non-Party Invoice

The importing Party shall not reject a Proof of Origin only for the reason that
the invoice was issued in the territory of a non-Party.

Article 3.23: Verification

1. The importing Party may request the issuing body“ of the exporting
Party to conduct a retroactive check at random or when the importing Party
has reasonable doubt as to the authenticity of the document or as to the
accuracy of the information regarding the true origin of the good in question or
of certain parts thereof, subject to the following procedures:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

the request of the importing Party for a retroactive check
shall be accompanied with the Proof of Origin concerned
and shall specify the reasons and any additional information
suggesting that the particulars given on the said Proof of
Origin may be inaccurate, unless the retroactive check is
requested on a random basis;

the issuing body of the exporting Party receiving a request
for retroactive check shall respond to the request promptly
and reply the result within two months after receipt of the
request;

If the customs authority of the importing Party considers
necessary, it may require additional information relating to
the origin of the good. If additional information is requested
by the customs authority of the importing Party, the issuing
body of the exporting Party shall provide the information
requested in a period not exceeding four months after the
date of receipt of the request; and

the customs authority of the importing Party may suspend
provision of preferential tariff treatment while awaiting the
result of verification. However, it may release the good to
the importer subject to any administrative measures deemed
necessary, provided that they are not held to be subject to
import prohibition or restriction and there is no suspicion of
fraud.

2. The customs authority of the importing Party may request an importer
for information or documents relating to the origin of an imported good in
accordance with its domestic laws and regulations before requesting the
retroactive check pursuant to paragraph 1.

'4 In the case of Korea, the issuing body of origin verification refers to the customs authority
in accordance with its customs laws and regulations. In the case of Indonesia, issuing body
of origin verification refers to its laws and regulations.

3-18

3. If the importing Party is not satisfied with the outcome of the
retroactive check, it may, under exceptional circumstances, request
verification visits to the exporting Party.

4. Prior to conducting a verification visit pursuant to paragraph 3:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

an importing Party shall deliver a written notification of its
intention to conduct the verification visit simultaneously to:

(1) the producer or exporter whose premises are to be
visited;

(11) the issuing body of the Party in the territory of
which the verification visit is to occur;

(111) the customs authority of the Party in the territory of
which the verification visit is to occur; and

(iv) the importer of the good subject to the verification
visit;

the written notification mentioned in subparagraph (a) shall
be as comprehensive as possible and shall include, among
others:

(1) the name of the customs authority issuing the
notification;
(11) the name of the producer or exporter whose

premises are to be visited;

(111) the proposed date of the verification visit;

(iv) the coverage of the proposed verification visit,
including reference to the good subject to the

verification; and

(v) the names and designation of the officials
performing the verification visit;

an importing Party shall obtain the written consent of the
producer or exporter whose premises are to be visited;

when a written consent from the producer or exporter is not

obtained within 30 days from the date of receipt of the
notification pursuant to subparagraph (a), the notifying Party

3-19

may deny preferential tariff treatment to the good referred to
in the said Proof of Origin that would have been subject to
the verification visit; and

(e) the issuing body receiving the notification may postpone the
proposed verification visit and notify the importing Party of
such intention within 15 days from the date of receipt of the
notification. Notwithstanding any postponement, any
verification visit shall be carried out within 60 days from the
date of such receipt, or a longer period as the Parties may
agree.

5. The Party conducting the verification visit shall provide the producer
or exporter, whose good is subject to such verification, and the relevant
issuing body with a written determination of whether or not the good subject
to such verification qualifies as an originating good.

6. Any suspended preferential tariff treatment shall be reinstated upon
the written determination referred to in paragraph 5 that the good qualifies as
an originating good.

7. The producer or exporter shall be allowed 30 days from the date of
receipt of the written determination to provide in writing comments or
additional information regarding the eligibility of the good for preferential
tariff treatment. If the good is still found to be non-originating, the final
written determination shall be communicated to the relevant issuing body
within 30 days from the date of receipt of the comments or the additional
information from the producer or exporter.

8. The verification visit process, including the actual visit and the
determination under paragraph 5 whether the good subject to such verification
is originating or not, shall be carried out and its results shall be communicated
to the relevant issuing body within a maximum period of six months from the
first day the initial verification visit was conducted. While the process of
verification is being undertaken, subparagraph 1(d) shall be applied.

Article 3.24: Denial of Preferential Tariff Treatment

l. The customs authority of the importing Party may deny preferential
tariff treatment without verification of a Proof of Origin, in accordance with its
laws and regulations, as the Proof of Origin can be considered as inapplicable
when:

(a) the requirements on direct consignment of Article 3.9 have
not been fulfilled;

(b) the Proof of Origin is produced subsequently for goods that
were initially imported fraudulently;

(c) the Proof of Origin has been issued in a non-Party to this
Agreement;

(d) the importer fails to submit the Proof of Origin to the
customs authorities of the importing Party within the period
specified in the domestic laws and regulations of the
importing Party; or

(e) such other matters arise as the Parties may agree.

2. During verification procedures, the customs authority of the
importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment when the issuing body
of the exporting Party, exporter, or producer fail to comply with Article 3.20 or
Article 3.23.

Article 3.25: Electronic Origin Data Exchange System
The Parties may develop an electronic system for origin information exchange
to ensure the effective and efficient implementation of this Chapter.

Article 3.26: Transitional Provisions for Goods in Transit and Storage

A Party shall grant preferential tariff treatment to an originating good that, on
the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that Party:

(a) was being transported to that Party in accordance with the
Direct Consignment provisions in Article 3.9; or

(b) had not been imported into the territory of that Party;
if a valid claim under Article 3.18 for preferential tariff treatment is made

within 180 days from the date of entry into force of this Agreement for that
Party.

CHAPTER 4
CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TRADE FACILITATION

Article 4.1: Publication

1. Each Party shall publish, including on the internet, laws, regulations,
and general administrative procedures related to import and export.

2. Each Party shall designate or maintain one or more inquiry points to
address reasonable inquiries by interested persons concerning customs matters
and make available on the internet information concerning the procedures for
making such inquiries.

3. To the extent possible, each Party shall provide opportunities and
reasonable time period to interested persons to comment on the proposed
introduction or amendments of general laws, regulations, and general
administrative procedures related to import and export.

Article 4.2: Release of Goods

1. In order to facilitate bilateral trade, each Party shall adopt or maintain
simplified customs procedures for the efficient release of goods.

2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures
that:

(a) provide for the release of goods within a period no greater
than that required to ensure compliance with its customs laws
and regulations;

(b) provide for customs information to be submitted and
processed manually or electronically before the goods arrive
in order for them to be released on their arrival;

(c) allow goods to be released at the point of arrival, without
temporary transfer to warehouses or other facilities; and

(d) allow importers to withdraw goods from customs with
guarantees, before, and without prejudice to, its customs
authority’s final determination of the applicable customs
duties, taxes, and fees.

4-]

Article 4.3: Automation

To the extent possible, each Party shall use information technology that
expedites procedures for the release of goods and shall:

(a) make electronic systems accessible to customs users;
(b) endeavour to use international standards;
(c) endeavour to develop electronic systems that are compatible

with the other Party’s systems, in order to facilitate bilateral
exchange of international trade data; and

(d) endeavour to develop a set of common data elements and
processes in accordance with World Customs Organisation
(hereinafter referred to as the “WCO”) Customs Data Model
and related WCO recommendations and guidelines.

Article 4.4: Risk Management

Each Party shall adopt or maintain electronic or automated risk management
systems for assessment and targeting that enable its customs authority to focus
its inspection activities on high-risk consignments and that simplify the
clearance and movement of low-risk consignments.

Article 4.5: Cooperation

1. With a view to facilitating the effective operation of this Agreement,
each Party shall endeavour to provide the other Party with advance notice of
any significant modification of administrative policy or other similar
development related to its laws or regulations governing importations and
exportations that is likely to substantially affect the operation of this
Agreement.

2. The Parties affirm their commitment to facilitate the legitimate
movement of goods and shall exchange expertise on measures to improve
customs techniques and procedures, and on computerised systems.

3. The Parties shall commit to:

(a) pursuing the harmonisation of documentation and data
elements used in trade according to international standards for
the purpose of facilitating the flow of trade between them in
customs-related matters regarding the importation,

(b)

(f)

(g)

(h)

exportation, and transit of goods;

intensifying cooperation between their customs laboratories
and scientific departments and to working towards the
harmonisation of customs laboratories methods;

exchanging customs’ personnel;

jointly organising training programs on _ customs-related
issues, for the officials who participate directly in customs
procedures;

developing effective mechanisms for communicating with the
trade and business communities;

assisting, to the extent practicable, each other in the tariff
classification, valuation, and determination of origin;

promoting strong and efficient intellectual property rights
enforcement by customs authorities, regarding imports,
exports, re-exports, transit, transshipments, and other customs
procedures, and in particular as regards counterfeit goods; and

improving the security, while facilitating trade, of sea-
container and other shipments from all locations that are
imported into, transshipped through, or transiting the Parties.
The Parties agree that the objectives of the intensified and
broadened cooperation include, but are not limited to:

(1) working together to reinforce the customs-related
aspects for securing the logistics chain of
international trade; and

(11) coordinating positions, to the greatest extent
practicable, in any multilateral fora where issues
related to container security may be appropriately
raised and discussed.

Article 4.6: Confidentiality

l. Where a Party that provides information to the other Party in
accordance with this Chapter designates the information as confidential, the
other Party shall keep the information confidential. The Party providing the
information may require the other Party to furnish written assurance that the
information will be held in confidence, will be used only for the purpose the

other Party specified in its request for information, and will not be disclosed
without the specific permission of the Party that provided the information or
the person that provided the information to that Party.

2. If a Party receives information designated as confidential in
accordance with paragraph 1, the Party receiving the information may, under
its domestic law and legal system, use or disclose the information for law
enforcement purposes or in the course of judicial proceedings with a written
consent from the other Party.

3. A Party may decline to provide information that the other Party has
requested where that Party has failed to act in conformity with paragraph 1.

4. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for protecting from
unauthorised disclosure of confidential information submitted in accordance
with the administration of the Party’s customs laws, including information the
disclosure of which could prejudice the competitive position of the person
providing the information.

Article 4.7: Express Shipments

Each Party is encouraged to adopt or maintain expedited customs procedures
for express shipments while maintaining appropriate customs control and
selection. These procedures shall:

(a) provide for a separate and expedited customs procedures for
express shipments and, where applicable, use the WCO
Guidelines for the Immediate Release of Consignments;

(b) provide for information necessary to process an express
shipment to be submitted manually or electronically before
the shipment arrives; and

(c) to the extent possible, provide for certain goods to be cleared
with a minimum of documentation.
Article 4.8: Review or Appeal

Each Party shall ensure that with respect to its determinations/decisions on
customs matters, importers in its territory have access to:

(a) a level of administrative review or appeal higher than or
independent of the employee or office that issued the
determinations/decisions; and

(b) judicial review or appeal of the determinations/decisions.

Article 4.9: Penalties

Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures that allow for the imposition of
civil or administrative penalties and, where appropriate, criminal sanctions for
violations of its customs laws and regulations.

Article 4.10: Advance Rulings

1. Each Party shall issue, through its customs authority, before a good is
imported into its territory, a written advance ruling or information at the
written request of an importer in its territory, with regard to:

(a) ruling on tariff classification;

(b) information on the application of customs valuation criteria
for a particular case, in accordance with the Article VII of
GATT 1994 and Customs Valuation Agreement; or

(c) any such other matters as the Parties may agree.

2. An advanced ruling and information issued by a Party shall be binding
on that Party in respect of the applicant that had sought it.

3. Each Party shall issue an advance ruling within 90 days after its
customs authority receives a request, provided that the requester has submitted
all information that the Party requires, including, if the Party requests, a
sample of the good for which the requester is seeking an advance ruling. In
issuing an advance ruling, the Party shall take into account facts and
circumstances the requester has provided. For greater certainty, a Party may
decline to issue an advance ruling if the facts and circumstances forming the
basis of the advance ruling are the subject of administrative or judicial review.
A Party that, pursuant to this paragraph, declines to issue an advance ruling
shall promptly notify the requester in writing, setting forth the relevant facts
and the basis for its decision to decline to issue the advance ruling.

4. Each Party shall provide that advance rulings shall take effect on the
date they are issued, or on another date specified in the ruling, provided that
the facts or circumstances on which the ruling is based remain unchanged.

5. The issuing Party may modify or revoke an advance ruling and shall
promptly provide written notice to the requester.

6. Each Party shall ensure that requesters have access to administrative
review of advance rulings.

7. If a requester provides false information or omits relevant facts or
circumstances relating to the advance ruling, or does not act in accordance
with the ruling’s terms and conditions, the importing Party may apply
appropriate measures, including civil, criminal, and administrative actions,
monetary penalties, or other sanctions.

Article 4.11: Consultation

1. Either customs authority at any time may request for consultations
with the other customs authority on any matter arising from the operation or
implementation of this Chapter and Chapter three (Rules of Origin and Origin
Procedures), in cases where there are reasonable grounds or truth provided by
the requesting Party. Such consultations shall be conducted through the
relevant contact points.

2. In the event that such consultations fail to resolve any such matter, the
requesting Party may refer the matter to the Committee on Customs and Trade
Facilitation referred to in Article 4.12.

Article 4.12: Committee on Customs and Trade Facilitation

1. The Parties hereby establish Committee on Customs and Trade
Facilitation (hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”) composed of the
customs authorities of the Parties. Other competent authorities of the Parties
may join the Committee if the Parties deem it necessary.

2. The Committee shall ensure the proper functioning of this Chapter
and Chapter Three (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures) and examine all
the issues arising from the application of these Chapters.

3. The functions of the Committee may include:

(a) reviewing, discussing, and proposing effective, uniform, and
consistent administration of this Chapter and Chapter Three
(Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures);

(b) reviewing, discussing, and proposing uniform regulations for
the effective, uniform, and consistent interpretation of this
Chapter and Chapter Three (Rules of Origin and Origin
Procedures);

(c) revising Annex 3-A (Product Specific Rules) on the basis of
the transposition of the Harmonised System (hereinafter
referred to as the “HS”);

(d) consulting on and endeavouring to resolve any difference that
may arise between the Parties on matters related to the
classification of goods under the HS;

(e) reviewing the possibility of revision and reaching agreement
on revision of this Chapter and Chapter Three (Rules of

Origin and Origin Procedures);

4. The Committee shall meet every year, or as otherwise agreed,
alternating between the Parties.

4-7

CHAPTER 5
TRADE REMEDIES

Section A: Safeguard Measures

Article 5.1: Definitions
For purposes of Section A:

competent authority means:

(a) for Korea, the Korea Trade Commission, or its successor;
and
(b) for Indonesia, the Ministry of Trade, or its successor;

domestic industry means, with respect to an imported good, the producers as
a whole of the like or directly competitive good operating in the territory of a
Party, or those whose collective output of the like or directly competitive good
constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic production of that good;

safeguard measure means a measure described in Article 5.2;

serious injury means a significant overall impairment in the position of a
domestic industry;

substantial cause means a cause that is important and not less than any other
cause;

threat of serious injury means serious injury that, on the basis of facts and
not merely on allegation, conjecture, or remote possibility, is clearly
imminent; and

transition period means the ten-year period following the date of entry into
force of this Agreement, except that for any good for which the Schedule in
Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of Custom Duties) of the Party applying
the safeguard measure provides for the Party to eliminate its tariffs on the
good over a period of more than ten years, transition period means the tariff
elimination period for the good set out in that Schedule.

5-1

Article 5.2: Application of a Safeguard Measure

If, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this
Agreement, an originating good of the other Party is being imported into the
territory of a Party in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to
domestic production, and under such conditions that the imports of such
originating good of the other Party constitute a substantial cause of serious
injury, or threat thereof, to a domestic industry producing a like or directly
competitive good, the Party may:

(a) suspend the further reduction of any rate of customs duty
on the good provided for under this Agreement;

(b) increase the rate of customs duty on the good to a level not
to exceed the lesser of:

(1) the most-favoured-nation (hereinafter referred to
as “MFN”’) applied rate of duty on the good in
effect at the time the measure is taken; or

(11) the base rate of customs duty specified in the
Schedules in Annex 2-A_ (Reduction or
Elimination of Customs Duties) pursuant to
Article 2.4 (Reduction or Elimination of
Customs Duties); or

(111) the MFN applied rate of duty on the good in
effect on the day immediately preceding the
date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 5.3: Conditions and Limitations

1. A Party shall notify the other Party in writing immediately after the
initiation of an investigation described in paragraph 2, and should conduct a
public hearing and consultations after the initiation as practicable with a view
to reviewing the information arising from the initiation of the investigation.

2. A Party shall apply a safeguard measure only following an
investigation by the Party’s competent authorities in accordance with Articles
3 and 4.2(c) of the Safeguards Agreement, and to this end, Articles 3 and
4.2(c) of the Safeguards Agreement are incorporated into and made a part of
this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

3. In the investigation described in paragraph 2, the Party shall comply
with the requirements of Article 4.2(a) of the Safeguards Agreement, and to

5-2

this end, Article 4.2(a) of the Safeguards Agreement is incorporated into and
made a part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

4. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities complete any
such investigation within six months of its date of initiation.

5. Neither Party may apply a safeguard measure:

(a) except to the extent, and for such time, as may be
necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to
facilitate adjustment;

(b) for a period exceeding two years, except that the period
may be extended by up to one year if the competent
authorities of the importing Party determine, in conformity
with the procedures specified in this Article, that the
measure continues to be necessary to prevent or remedy
serious injury and to facilitate adjustment and that there is
evidence that the industry is adjusting, provided that the
total period of application of a safeguard measure,
including the period of initial application and any
extension thereof, shall not exceed three years; or

(c) beyond the expiration of the transition period, except with
the consent of the other Party.

6. A Party shall not apply a safeguard measure more than once on the
same good until a period of time equal to the duration of the previous
safeguard measure, including any extension, has elapsed commencing from
the termination of the previous safeguard measure, provided that the period of
non-application is at least two years.

7. Where the expected duration of the safeguard measure is over one
year, the importing Party shall progressively liberalise it at regular intervals.

8. When a Party terminates a safeguard measure, the rate of customs
duty shall be the rate that, according to the Party’s Schedule in Annex 2-A
(Reduction or Elimination of Custom Duties), would have been in effect but
for the measure.

Article 5.4: Provisional Measures
l. In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage that

would be difficult to repair, a Party may apply a safeguard measure on a
provisional basis pursuant to a preliminary determination by its competent

5-3

authorities that there is clear evidence that imports of an originating good of
the other Party have increased as the result of the reduction or elimination of a
customs duty under this Agreement, and such imports constitute a substantial
cause of serious injury, or threat thereof, to the domestic industry.

2. Before a Party’s competent authorities may make a preliminary
determination, the Party shall publish a public notice in its official journal
setting forth how interested parties, including importers and exporters, may
obtain a non-confidential copy of the application requesting a provisional
safeguard measure, and shall provide interested parties at least 20 days after
the date it publishes the notice to submit evidence and views regarding the
application of a provisional measure. A Party may not apply a provisional
measure until at least 45 days after the date its competent authorities initiate an
investigation.

3. The applying Party shall notify the other Party before applying a
safeguard measure on a provisional basis, and shall initiate consultations
immediately after applying the measure.

4. The duration of any provisional measure shall not exceed 180 days,
during which time the Party shall comply with the requirements of Articles
5.3.2 and 5.3.3.

5. The Party shall promptly refund any tariff increases if the
investigation described in Article 5.3.2 does not result in a finding that the
requirements of Article 5.2 are met. The duration of any provisional measure
shall be counted as part of the period described in Article 5.3.5(b).

Article 5.5: Compensation

1. Within 30 days after a Party applies a safeguard measure, the Party
shall afford an opportunity for the other Party to consult with it regarding
appropriate trade liberalising compensation in the form of concessions having
substantially equivalent trade effects or equivalent to the value of the
additional duties expected to result from the measure. The applying Party shall
provide such compensation as the Parties mutually agree.

2. If the Parties are unable to agree on compensation through
consultations under paragraph | within 30 days after the consultations begin,
the Party against whose originating good the measure is applied may suspend
the application of concessions with respect to originating goods of the
applying Party that have trade effects substantially equivalent to the safeguard
measure.

3. The right of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall not be
exercised for the first two years that the safeguard measure is in effect,
provided that the safeguard measure has been taken as a result of an absolute
increase in imports and that such a measure conforms to the provisions of this
Section.

4. The applying Party’s obligation to provide compensation under
paragraph 1 and the other Party’s right to suspend concessions under
paragraph 2 shall terminate on the date the safeguard measure terminates.

5. Any compensation shall be based on the total period of application
of the provisional safeguard measure and of the safeguard measure.

Article 5.6: Global Safeguard Measures

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of
GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement. This Agreement does not confer
any additional rights or obligations on the Parties with regard to measures
taken under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement,
except that a Party taking a global safeguard measure may exclude imports of
an originating good of the other Party if such imports are not a substantial
cause of serious injury or threat thereof.

2. At the request of the other Party, the Party intending to take a global
safeguard measure may provide immediately ad hoc written notification of all
pertinent information on the initiation of a safeguard investigation, the
preliminary determination and the final finding of the investigation.

3. Neither Party may apply, with respect to the same good, at the same
time:
(a) a safeguard measure; and
(b) a measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the
Safeguards Agreement.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, neither Party may impose a
safeguard measure on a good to which a measure is being applied pursuant to
Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement. When a Party
intends to apply, pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards
Agreement, a measure on a good to which a safeguard measure is being
applied, it shall terminate the safeguard measure prior to the imposition of the
measure to be applied pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the
Safeguards Agreement.

Section B: Anti-Dumping and Countervailing Duties

Article 5.7: General Provisions

1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, each Party
retains its rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement with regard to the
application of anti-dumping and countervailing duties.

2. The Parties shall ensure, immediately after any imposition of
provisional measures and in any case before the final determination, full and
meaningful disclosure of all essential facts and considerations which form the
basis for the decision to apply measures, without prejudice to Article 6.5 of the
Anti-Dumping Agreement and Article 12.4 of the SCM Agreement.
Disclosures shall be made in writing, and interested parties shall be allowed
sufficient time to make their comments.

3. The Parties shall observe the following practices in anti-dumping or
countervailing cases between them in order to enhance transparency in the
implementation of the WTO Agreement:

(a) when anti-dumping margins are established, assessed, or
reviewed under Articles 2, 9.3, 9.5, and 11 of the Anti-
Dumping Agreement regardless of the comparison bases
under Article 2.4.2 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement, all
individual margins, whether positive or negative, should
be counted toward the average;

(b) if a decision is taken to impose an anti-dumping duty
pursuant to Article 9.1 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement,
the Party taking such a decision may apply the ‘lesser
duty’ rule, by imposing a duty which is less than the
dumping margin where such lesser duty would be
adequate to remove the injury to the domestic industry;

(c) When a Party considers imposing an anti-dumping or
countervailing duty, careful consideration should be given
to the interests of the other Party; and

(d) The investigating Party shall request an exporter or
producer in the territory of the other Party for a timely
response to its questionnaires. When the investigating
Party finds major deficiency in information in a
questionnaire response from relevant exporter or producer
received before the deadline or requires clarifications for

5-6

purposes of investigation, the investigating Party shall
demand missing information or request clarification of
information concerning the answers to the questionnaires.
This procedure shall not be used to cause unwarranted
delays in the investigation or to circumvent the deadlines.

Article 5.8: Notification and Consultations

1. Upon receipt by a Party’s competent authorities of a properly
documented anti-dumping application with respect to imports from the other
Party, and no later than 15 days before initiating an investigation, the Party
shall provide written notification to the other Party of its receipt of the
application.

2. Upon receipt by a Party’s competent authorities of a properly
documented countervailing duty application with respect to imports from the
other Party, and before initiating an investigation, the Party shall provide
written notification to the other Party of its receipt of the application and
afford the other Party a meeting to consult with its competent authorities
regarding the application.

3. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under Annex II of the
Anti-Dumping Agreement and in particular its paragraph 5, and under Articles
12.7 and 12.8 of the SCM Agreement. In the event the investigating authorities
intend to make a determination on the basis of the facts available pursuant to
Article 6.8 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement and Article 12.7 of the SCM
Agreement, the investigating authorities shall provide a reasoned and adequate
explanation of:

(a) indication of conditions under which the use of facts
available is applicable;

(b) the information which interested parties have failed to
submit to the investigating authorities; and

(c) the facts with which the investigating authorities decided
to replace the information referred to in subparagraph (b).
Article 5.9: Investigation after Termination Resulting from a Review
A Party shall examine, with special care, any application for initiation of an
anti-dumping investigation on an originating good of the other Party on which

anti-dumping measures have been terminated in the previous 12 months as a
result of a review. Unless this pre-initiation examination indicates that the

5-7

circumstances have changed, the investigation shall not proceed.

Article 5.10: Cumulative Assessment

When imports from more than one country are simultaneously subject to an
anti-dumping or countervailing duty investigation, a Party shall examine, with
special care, whether the cumulative assessment of the effect of the imports
from the other Party is appropriate in light of the conditions of competition
between the imported goods and the conditions of competition between the
imported goods and the like domestic goods.

Article 5.11: Cooperation in Anti-Circumvention Investigations

1. The Parties agree to cooperate in preventing circumvention in
accordance with Articles 5 and 6 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement.

2. The Parties agree to carry out anti-circumvention investigations in a
transparent way and to respect the right of all interested parties to defend their
concerns in every step of the anti-circumvention investigation.

3. At the request of the other Party, the Party conducting an anti-
circumvention investigation shall provide non-confidential information
regarding the companies under investigation to the other Party.

4. In any proceedings in which a Party determines to conduct an on-site
verification in the territory of the other Party, it shall notify the companies
under investigation in advance.

5. The Party conducting an anti-circumvention investigation shall
inform, before the final determination, all interested parties in the territory of
the other Party of the essential facts under consideration, which form the basis
for the assessment on whether to apply the measure or to grant an exemption.
The Party will provide adequate opportunity for all interested parties to make
comments on such assessment. Such disclosure of the essential facts should
take place within a reasonable period of time for interested parties to defend
their interests. Interested parties may also apply to be heard.

5-8

CHAPTER 6
TRADE IN SERVICES
Article 6.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:
aircraft repair and maintenance services means such activities when
undertaken on an aircraft or a part thereof while it is withdrawn from service

and do not include so-called line maintenance;

commercial presence means any type of business or professional
establishment, including through:

(a) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical
person; or

(b) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative
office,

within the territory of a Party for the purpose of supplying a service;

computer reservation system (CRS) services means services provided by

computerised systems that contain information about air carriers’ schedules,

availability, fares and fare rules, through which reservations can be made or

tickets may be issued;

juridical person of the other Party means a juridical person which is either:
(a) constituted or otherwise organised under the laws and

regulations of the other Party, and is engaged in substantive

business operations in the territory of the other Party; or

(b) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial
presence, owned or controlled by:

(i) natural persons of the other Party; or

(ii) juridical persons of the other Party identified under
subparagraph (a);

a juridical person is:

(a) owned by persons of a Party if more than 50 per cent of the
equity interest in it is beneficially owned by persons of that

6-1

Party;

(b) controlled by persons of a Party if such persons have the
power to name a majority of its directors or otherwise to
legally direct its actions;

(c) affiliated with another person when it controls, or is
controlled by, that other person; or when it and the other
person are both controlled by the same person;

measure means any measure as defined in Article 1.1 (General Definitions) by
a party affecting trade in services including measures in respect of:

(a) the purchase, payment, or use of a service;

(b) the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a
service, services which are required by a Party to be offered to
the public generally; and

(c) the presence, including commercial presence, in its territory
of a service supplier of the other Party;

monopoly supplier of a service means any person, public or private, which in
the relevant market of the territory of a Party is authorised or established
formally or in effect by that Party as the sole supplier of that service;

natural person of the other Party means a natural person who resides in the
territory of the other Party or elsewhere and who under the law of the other
Party is a national of the other Party;

person means either a natural person or a juridical person;
sector of a service means,

(a) with reference to a specific commitment, one or more, or all,
subsectors of that service, as specified in a Party’s Schedule;

(b) otherwise, the whole of that service sector, including all of its
subsectors;

selling and marketing of air transport services means opportunities for the
air carrier concerned to sell and market freely its air transport services
including all aspects of marketing such as market research, advertising and
distribution. These activities do not include the pricing of air transport
services nor the applicable conditions;

6-2

services includes any service in any sector except services supplied in the
exercise of governmental authority;

a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means any
service which is supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in competition
with one or more service suppliers;

service consumer means any person that receives or uses a service;

service of the other Party means a service which is supplied:

(a) from or in the territory of the other Party, or in the case of
maritime transport, by a vessel registered under the laws of
the other Party, or by a person of the other Party which
supplies the service through the operation of a vessel and/or
its use in whole or in part; or

(b) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial
presence or through the presence of natural persons, by a
service supplier of the other Party;

e e . . 1
service supplier means any person that supplies a service;

supply of a service includes the production, distribution, marketing, sale and
delivery of a service;

trade in services is defined as the supply of a service:

(a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other

Party;

(b) in the territory of a Party to the service consumer of the other
Party;

(c) by a service supplier of a Party, through commercial presence

in the territory of the other Party; and

(d) by a service supplier of a Party, through presence of natural
persons of a Party in the territory of the other Party; and

' Where the service is not supplied directly by a juridical person but through other forms of
commercial presence such as a branch or a representative office, the service supplier (i.e. the
juridical person) shall, nonetheless, through such presence be accorded the treatment provided
for service suppliers under this Chapter. Such treatment shall be extended to the presence
through which the service is supplied and need not be extended to any other parts of the
supplier located outside the territory where the service is supplied.

6-3

traffic rights means the right for scheduled and non-scheduled services to
operate and/or to carry passengers, cargo and mail for remuneration or hire
from, to, within, or over the territory of a Party, including points to be served,
routes to be operated, types of traffic to be carried, capacity to be provided,
tariffs to be charged and their conditions, and criteria for designation of
airlines, including such criteria as number, ownership, and control.

Article 6.2: Scope

1. This Chapter applies to measures by a Party affecting trade in
Services.

2. For purposes of this Chapter, measures by a Party means measures
taken by:

(a) central, regional, or local governments and authorities; and

(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated
by central, regional or local governments or authorities.

3. This Chapter shall not apply to:

(a) a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority
within the territory of each respective Party;

(b) measures affecting air traffic rights, however granted; or to
measures affecting services directly related to the exercise of
air traffic rights, other than measures affecting:

(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services;
(11) the selling and marketing of air transport services;
and

(111) computer reservation system services;
(c) cabotage in maritime transport services;

(d) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-
supported loans, guarantees and insurance;

(e) government procurement; and

(f) measures affecting natural persons seeking access to the
employment market of a Party and measures regarding

6-4

citizenship, residence or employment on a permanent basis.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from applying
measures to regulate the entry of natural persons of the other Party into, or
their temporary stay in, its territory, including those measures necessary to
protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly movement of natural persons
across its borders, provided that such measures are not applied in such a
manner as to nullify or impair the benefits” accruing to the other Party under
the terms of a specific commitment.

Article 6.3: National Treatment

1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule, and subject to any conditions
and qualifications set out therein, each Party shall accord to services and
service suppliers of the other Party, in respect of all measures affecting the
supply of services, treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like
circumstances, to its own services and service suppliers .

2. The treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means,
with respect to a regional level of government, treatment no less favourable
than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by that
regional level of government to services and service suppliers of the Party of
which it forms a part.

3. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to
services and service suppliers of the other Party, either formally identical
treatment or formally different treatment to that it accords to its own like
services and service suppliers.

4. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be
considered to be less favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in
favour of services or service suppliers of the Party compared to like services or
service suppliers of the other Party.

Article 6.4: Most-favoured-Nation Commitments

1. The Parties shall, in respect of the services sectors and subsectors
listed in their Schedules to Annex 6-D and 6-E that are identified with an

* The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons of certain countries and not for those of

others shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing benefits under a specific commitment.
* Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require any Party

to compensate for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign
character of the relevant services or service suppliers.

6-5

'MEN', and subject to any conditions and qualifications set out therein, accord
to services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less favourable
than that it accords to like services and service suppliers of a non-Party.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, each Party reserves the right to adopt
or maintain any measure that accords differential treatment to services and
service suppliers of a non-Party under any bilateral or multilateral international
agreement in force or signed prior to the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, Indonesia reserves the right to adopt
or maintain any measure that accords differential treatment to services and
service suppliers of any other ASEAN Member State Party taken under an
agreement on the liberalisation of trade in goods or services or investment as
part of a wider process of economic integration between or among ASEAN
Member States.

4. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed as to prevent
any Party from conferring or according advantages to adjacent countries in
order to facilitate exchange limited to contiguous frontier zones of services
that are both locally produced and consumed.

Article 6.5: Market Access

1. With respect to market access through the modes of supply
identified in Article 6.1, a Party shall accord services and service suppliers of
the other Party treatment no less favourable than that provided for under the
terms, limitations and conditions agreed and specified in its Schedule.*

2. In sectors where market-access commitments are undertaken, the
measures which a Party shall not maintain or adopt either on the basis of a
regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory, unless otherwise
specified in its Schedule, are defined as:

(a) limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the
form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service
suppliers or the requirements of an economic needs test;

* If a Party undertakes a market-access commitment in relation to the supply of a service

through the mode of supply referred to in Article 6.1 trade in services (a) and if the cross-
border movement of capital is an essential part of the service itself, that Party is thereby
committed to allow such movement of capital. If a Party undertakes a market-access
commitment in relation to the supply of a service through the mode of supply referred to in
Article 6.1 trade in services (c), it is thereby committed to allow related transfers of capital
into its territory.

6-6

(b)

(c)

(d)

(c)

(f)

limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets
in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an
economic needs test;

limitations on the total number of service operations or on the
total quantity of service output expressed in terms of
designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the
requirement of an economic needs test;°

limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a particular service sector or that a service
supplier may employ and who are necessary for, and directly
related to, the supply of a specific service in the form of
numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity
or joint venture through which a service supplier may supply a
service; and

limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of

maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.

Article 6.6: Additional Commitments

The Parties may negotiate commitments with respect to measures affecting
trade in services not subject to scheduling under Article 6.3 or Article 6.5,
including those regarding qualifications, standards or licensing matters. Such
commitments shall be inscribed in a Party’s Schedule.

Article 6.7: Schedules of Specific Commitments

1. Each Party shall set out in its Schedule the specific commitments it
undertakes under Article 6.3, Article 6.5, and Article 6.6. With respect to
sectors where such commitments are undertaken, each Schedule shall specify:

(a)
(b)

5

Services.

terms, limitations and conditions on market access;

conditions and qualifications on national treatment;

Subparagraph 2 (c) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of

6-7

(c) undertakings relating to additional commitments;

(d) where appropriate the time-frame for implementation of such
commitment; and

(e) the date of entry into force of such commitment.
2. Measures inconsistent with Article 6.3 shall be inscribed in the
column relating to Article 6.3, and measures inconsistent with Article 6.5 shall

be inscribed in the column relating to Article 6.5.

3. In addition to commitments referred to in paragraph 1, each Party
shall also make commitments under Article 6.4.

4. The Schedules shall be annexed to this Chapter and shall form an
integral part thereof.
5. Neither Party may adopt new, or more, discriminatory measures

with regard to services and service supplier of the other Party in comparison
with treatment accorded pursuant to the specific commitments undertaken in
conformity with paragraph 1.

6. Each Party shall identify in its schedule sectors or sub-sectors for
future liberalisation with an 'FL'. In these sectors and subsectors, any
applicable terms, conditions, limitations, qualifications and undertakings
referred to in paragraph | shall be limited to measures that the Party maintains
on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

7. If a Party amends a measure referred to in paragraph 6 in a manner
that reduces or eliminates the inconsistency of that measure with Article 6.3
or 6.5, as it existed immediately before the amendment, that Party shall not
subsequently amend that measure in a way that increases the measure's
inconsistency with Article 6.3 or 6.5.

Article 6.8: Modification of Schedules

1. Notwithstanding article 6.7, if a Party requests a consultation to
discuss the possibility of modifying or withdrawing a commitment, and to
reach any necessary compensatory adjustment, the other Party shall enter into
consultation with the requesting Party. The requesting Party may not modify
or withdraw its commitment until the Parties reach an agreement on the
compensatory adjustment.

6-8

2. In achieving a compensatory adjustment, the Parties shall ensure that
the general level of mutually advantageous commitment is not less favourable
to trade than provided for in the Schedules prior to such negotiations.

3. If the Parties concerned are unable to reach an agreement on the
compensatory adjustment, the matter shall be resolved by arbitration in
accordance with Chapter Ten (Dispute Settlement) of this Agreement. The
modifying Party may not modify or withdraw its commitment until it has
made compensatory adjustments in conformity with the findings of the
arbitration.

4. If the modifying Party implements its proposed modification or
withdrawal and does not comply with the findings of the arbitration, the other
Party that participated in the arbitration may modify or withdraw substantially
equivalent benefits in conformity with those findings. Such a modification or
withdrawal may be implemented solely with respect to the modifying Party.

Article 6.9: Transparency

1. The Parties recognise that transparent measures governing trade in
services are important in facilitating the ability of service suppliers to gain
access to, and operate in, each other’s markets. Each Party shall promote
regulatory transparency in trade in services.

2. Each Party shall publish promptly and, except in emergency
situations, at the latest by the time of their entry into force:

(a) all relevant measures of general application affecting trade in
services; and

(b) all international agreements pertaining to, or affecting, trade in
services to which a Party is a signatory.

3. To the extent possible, each Party shall make the measures and
international agreements of the kind referred to in paragraph 2 available on the
internet and, to the extent provided for under its domestic legal framework, in
the English language.

4. Where publication referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 is not
practicable, such information® shall be made otherwise publicly available.

5. Each Party shall respond promptly to all requests by the other Party

° For greater certainty, the Parties agree that such information may be published in each

Party’s chosen language.

6-9

for specific information on any of its measures of general application or
international agreements within the meaning of paragraph 2. Each Party shall
also establish one or more enquiry points to provide specific information to the
other Party, upon request, on all such matters as well as those subject to the
notification requirement in paragraph 6. Such enquiry points shall be
established within two years from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.

6. Each Party shall promptly and at least annually inform the Joint
Committee of the introduction of any new, or any changes to existing, laws,
regulations or administrative guidelines which significantly affect trade in
services covered by its specific commitments under this Chapter.

7. Each Party may notify to the Joint Committee any measure, taken by
the other Party, which it considers affects the operation of this Chapter.

Article 6.10: Domestic Regulation

1. In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Party
shall ensure that all measures of general application affecting trade in services
are administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial manner.

2. (a) Each Party shall maintain or institute as soon as practicable
judicial, arbitral or administrative tribunals or procedures
which provide, at the request of an affected service supplier,
for the prompt review of, and where justified, appropriate
remedies for, administrative decisions affecting trade in
services. Where such procedures are not independent of the
agency entrusted with the administrative decision concerned,
the Party shall ensure that the procedures in fact provide for an
objective and impartial review.

(b) The provisions of subparagraph (a) shall not be construed to
require a Party to institute such tribunals or procedures where
this would be inconsistent with its constitutional structure or
the nature of its legal system.

3. Where a Party requires authorisation for the supply of a service on
which a specific commitments has been made, it shall ensure that its
competent authorities:

(a) ensure that any authorisation fees charged for the completion
of relevant application procedures are reasonable, transparent
and do not in themselves restrict the supply of a service. For
purposes of this sub-paragraph, authorisation fees do not

(b)

(d)

(c)

(f)

(g)

(h)

include fees for the use of natural resources, payment for
auctions, tendering, or other non-discriminatory means of
awarding concessions, or mandated contribution to universal
services provision;

within a reasonable period of time after the submission of an
application considered complete under domestic laws and
regulations, inform the applicant of the decision concerning
the application;

to the extent practicable establish an indicative timeframe for
processing of an application;

at the request of the applicant, provide, without undue delay,
information concerning the status of the application;

in the case of an incomplete application, at the request of the
applicant, where practicable, identify all the additional
information that is required to complete the application and
provide the opportunity to remedy deficiencies within a
reasonable timeframe;

if an application is terminated or denied, to the extent possible,
inform the applicant in writing, and without undue delay, the
reasons for such action. The applicant will have the possibility
of resubmitting, at its discretion, a new application;

to the extent permissible under its domestic laws and
regulations, do not require physical presence in the territory of
a Party for the submission of an application for a license or
qualification;

endeavour to accept applications in electronic format under the
equivalent conditions of authenticity as paper submissions in
accordance with domestic laws and regulations; and

where they deem appropriate, accept copies of documents
authenticated in accordance with domestic laws and
regulations, in place of original documents.

4. If the results of the negotiations related to Article VI (4) of the
GATS enter into effect, the Parties shall jointly review the results of such
WTO negotiations and shall amend this Article, as appropriate, after
consultation between the Parties to bring the results of such WTO negotiations
into effect under this Chapter. With a view to ensuring that measures relating
to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing

6-11

requirements do not constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in services, while
recognising the right to regulate and to introduce new regulations on the
supply of services in order to meet its policy objectives, each Party shall
endeavour to ensure that any such measures that it adopts or maintains are:

(a) based on objective and transparent criteria, such as
competence and the ability to supply the service;

(b) not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of
the service; and

(c) in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves a
restriction on the supply of the service.

5. (a) In sectors in which a Party has undertaken specific
commitments, pending the entry into force of disciplines
developed in these sectors pursuant to paragraph 4, the Party
shall not apply licensing and qualification requirements and
technical standards that nullify or impair such specific
commitments in a manner which:

(1) does not comply with the criteria outlined in
subparagraphs 4(a), (b) or (c); and

(11) could not reasonably have been expected of that Party at
the time the specific commitments in those sectors were
made.

(b) In determining whether a Party is in conformity with the
obligation under paragraph 5(a), account shall be taken of
international standards of relevant international organisations’
applied by that Party.

6. In sectors where specific commitments regarding professional
services are undertaken, each Party shall provide for adequate procedures to
verify the competence of professionals of the other Party.

Article 6.11: Recognition
1. For purposes of fulfilment of their respective standards or criteria

for the authorisation, licensing or certification of services suppliers, and
subject to paragraph 4 of this Article, each Party may recognise the education

’ The term "relevant international organisations" refers to international bodies whose
membership is open to the relevant bodies of at least all Members of the WTO.

6-12

or experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certifications granted
in the other Party. Such recognition, which may be achieved through
harmonisation or otherwise, may be based upon an agreement or arrangement
between the Parties or the relevant competent bodies or may be accorded
autonomously.

2. A Party that is a party to an agreement or arrangement of the type
referred to in paragraph 1, whether existing or future, shall afford adequate
opportunity for the other Party, if the other Party is interested, to negotiate its
accession to such an agreement or arrangement or to negotiate comparable
ones with it. Where a Party accords recognition autonomously, it shall afford
adequate opportunity for the other Party to demonstrate that education,
experience, licenses, or certifications obtained or requirements met in the other
Party’s territory should be recognised.

3. Nothing in Article 6.4 shall be construed to require the Party to
accord such recognition to the education or experience obtained, requirements
met, or licenses or certifications granted in the other Party.

4. A Party shall not accord recognition in a manner which would
constitute a means of discrimination between countries in the application of its
standards or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or certification of services
suppliers, or a disguised restriction on trade in services.

5. Each Party shall endeavour:

(a) within 12 months from the date on which this Agreement takes
effect for it, to inform the Joint Committee of its existing
recognition measures and state whether such measures are
based on agreements or arrangements of the type referred to in
paragraph 1;

(b) to promptly inform the Joint Committee as far in advance as
possible of the opening of negotiations on an agreement or
arrangement of the type referred to in paragraph 1 in order to
provide adequate opportunity to the other Party to indicate
their interest in participating in the negotiations before they
enter a substantive phase; and

(c) to promptly inform the Joint Committee when it adopts new
recognition measures or significantly modifies existing ones
and state whether the measures are based on an agreement or
arrangement of the type referred to in paragraph 1.

6. Wherever appropriate, recognition should be based on multilaterally
agreed criteria. In appropriate cases, the Parties shall work in cooperation

6-13

with relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organisations towards
the establishment and adoption of common international standards and criteria
for recognition and common international standards for the practice of relevant
services trades and professions.

7. As set out in Annex 6-C, the Parties shall endeavour to facilitate trade
in professional services.

Article 6.12: Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers

1. Each Party shall ensure that any monopoly supplier of a service in its
territory does not, in the supply of the monopoly service in the relevant market,
act in a manner inconsistent with that Party’s commitments under this Chapter.

2. Where a Party’s monopoly supplier competes, either directly or
through an affiliated juridical person, in the supply of a service outside the
scope of its monopoly rights and which is subject to that Party's specific
commitments, the Party shall ensure that such a supplier does not abuse its
monopoly position to act in its territory in a manner inconsistent with such
commitments.

3. If a Party has a reason to believe that a monopoly supplier of a
service of the other Party is acting in a manner inconsistent with paragraph 1
or 2, that Party may request the other Party establishing, maintaining or
authorising such supplier to provide specific information concerning the
relevant operations.

4. The provisions of this Article shall also apply to cases of exclusive
service suppliers, where a Party, formally or in effect,

(a) authorises or establishes a small number of service suppliers;
and

(b) substantially prevents competition among those suppliers in its
territory.

Article 6.13: Business Practices
1. The Parties recognise that certain business practices of service
suppliers, other than those falling under Article 6.12, may restrain competition

and thereby restrict trade in services.

2. Each Party shall, at the request of the other Party (the “Requesting
Party”), enter into consultations with a view to eliminating practices referred

6-14

to in paragraph 1. The Party addressed (the “Requested Party’), shall accord
full and sympathetic consideration to such a request and shall cooperate
through the supply of publicly available non-confidential information of
relevance to the matter in question. The Requested Party shall also provide
other information available to the Requesting Party, subject to its domestic law
and to the conclusion of satisfactory agreement concerning the safeguarding of
its confidentiality by the Requesting Party.

Article 6.14: Safeguard Measures

1. The Parties shall review the incorporation of safeguard measures
pending any further developments in the multilateral fora pursuant to Article X
of GATS.

2. In the event that after the entry into force of this Agreement, a Party
encounters difficulties in the implementation of commitments in this Chapter,
that Party may request consultation with the other Party to address such
difficulties.

Article 6.15: Payments and Transfers®

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers and payments relating to its
commitments in the trade in services to be made freely and without delay into
and out of its territory.

2. Each Party shall permit such transfers and payments relating to the
trade in services to be made in a freely usable currency at the market rate of
exchange prevailing at the time of transfer.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent or delay a
transfer or payment through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith

application of its laws and regulations relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency, or the protection of the rights of

creditors;

(b) issuing, trading, or dealing in securities, futures, options, or
derivatives;

(c) criminal or penal offences;

(d) ensuring compliance with the judgments in judicial or

* For greater certainty, Annex 7-C (Temporary Safeguard Measures) applies to this Article.

6-15

administrative proceedings;

(e) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when
necessary to assist law enforcement or financial regulatory
authorities;

(f) taxation; or

(g) severance entitlement of employees.

Article 6.16: Denial of Benefits

1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier
of the other Party that is a juridical person of the other Party, if:

(a) person of a non-Party own or control the juridical person; and

(b) the denying Party adopts or maintains measures with respect
to the non-Party or a person of the non-Party that prohibit
transactions with the juridical person or that would be violated
or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded
to the juridical person.

2. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter in the case of the
supply of a maritime transport service, if it establishes that the service is
supplied:

(a) by a vessel registered under the laws of a non-Party; and

(b) by a person of a non-Party which operates and/or uses the
vessel in whole or in part.

3. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier
of the other Party if the service supplier is a juridical person owned or
controlled by persons of a non-Party or of the denying Party that has no
substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party. If, before
denying the benefits of this Chapter, the denying Party knows that the juridical
person has no substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party
and that persons of a non-Party, or of the denying Party, own or control the
juridical person, the denying Party shall, to the extent practicable, notify the
other Party before denying the benefits.

Article 6.17: Progressive Liberalisation

The Parties shall, at the reviews pursuant to Article 13.5 (Review of the
Agreement) enter into successive rounds of negotiations to negotiate further
packages of specific commitments under this Chapter so as to progressively
liberalise trade in services between the Parties.

Article 6.18: Cooperation

The Parties shall strengthen cooperation efforts in services sectors, including
sectors which are not covered by existing cooperation arrangements. The
Parties shall discuss and mutually agree on the sectors for cooperation and
develop cooperation programs in these sectors in order to improve their
domestic capacities, efficiencies and competitiveness.

CHAPTER 7
INVESTMENT

Article 7.1: Definitions

covered investment means, with respect to a Party, an investment in its
territory of an investor of the other Party in existence as of the date of entry
into force of this Agreement or established, acquired or expanded thereafter
and which, where applicable, has been admitted according to its laws and
regulations.’

disputing parties means a disputing investor and a disputing Party;

disputing Party means a Party against which a claim is made under Article
7.19;

disputing party means a disputing investor or a disputing Party;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise constituted or organised under the
law of a Party, and a branch located in the territory of that Party and carrying
out business activities”?

freely usable currency means any currency that is widely used to make
payments for international transactions and is widely traded in the principal
exchange markets as determined by International Monetary Fund under its
Articles of Agreement and any amendment thereto;

ICSID Additional Facility Rules means the Rules Governing the Additional
Facility for the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes;

5,6,7

investment” means every kind of asset that an investor owns or controls,

' For greater certainty, in the case of Indonesia, “admitted according to its laws and
regulations” may include a requirement for specific approval in writing.

* A branch of an enterprise shall not make any claim against a Party under this Agreement.

° For greater certainty, the inclusion of a “branch” in the definitions of “enterprise of a Party”
is without prejudice to a Party’s ability to treat a branch under its laws as an entity that has no
independent legal existence and is not separately organised.

* A branch of a legal entity of a non-Party shall not be considered as an enterprise of a Party

> Where an asset lacks the characteristics of an investment, that asset is not an investment
regardless of the form it may take.

° The term “investment” does not include an order or judgment entered in a judicial or
administrative action.

’ For purpose of the definition of investment in this Article, returns that are invested shall be
treated as investments and any alteration of the form in which assets are invested or reinvested
shall not affect their character as investments.

7-1

that has the characteristics of an investment, including such characteristics as
the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of gain or profit,
or the assumption of risk. Forms that an investment may take include:

(a) an enterprise;

(b) shares, stock and other forms of equity participation in an
enterprise;

(c) bonds, debentures, other debt instruments, and loan*”;

(d) turnkey, construction, management, production, concession,

revenue-sharing, and other similar contracts;
(e) intellectual property rights;

(f) licenses, authorisations, permits, and similar rights conferred
pursuant to a Party’s law'®; and

(g) other tangible or intangible, movable or immovable property,
and related property rights, such as leases, mortgages, liens,
and pledges''.

For greater certainty, investment does not mean claims to money that arise
solely from:

(a) commercial contracts for sale of goods or services; or
(b) the extension of credit in connection with such commercial
contracts.

investor of a non-Party means, with respect to a Party, an investor that has
made an investment in the territory of that Party, that is not an investor of

® Some forms of debt, such as bonds, debentures and long-term notes, are more likely to have
the characteristics of an investment, while other forms of debt, such as claims to payment that
are immediately due and result from the sale of goods or services, are less likely to have such
characteristics.

” A loan issued by one Party to the other Party is not an investment.

'° Whether a particular type of license, authorisation, permit or similar instrument (including a
concession to the extent that it has the nature of such an instrument) has the characteristics of
an investment depends on such factors as the nature and extent of the rights that the holder has
under the Party’s law. Among such instruments that do not have the characteristics of an
investment are those that do not create any rights protected under the Party’s law. For greater
certainty, the foregoing is without prejudice to whether any asset associated with such
instruments has the characteristics of an investment.

'' For greater certainty, market share, market access, expected gains, and opportunities for
profit-making are not, by themselves, investments.

either Party;
investor of a Party means a natural person or an enterprise of a Party that is
seeking to make”, is making, or has made an investment in the territory of the

other Party;

non-disputing Party means the Party that is not a party to an investment
dispute; and

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules means the arbitration rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law adopted by United Nations
General Assembly on 28 April 1976.

Article 7.2: Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a
Party relating to:

(a) investors of the other Party; and

(b) covered investments.
2. For greater certainty, this Chapter does not bind either Party in
relation to any act or fact that took place or any situation that ceased to exist

before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

3. For purposes of this Chapter, measures adopted or maintained by a
Party means measures adopted or maintained by:

(a) central, regional, or local governments and authorities; and

(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated
by central, regional, or local governments or authorities.

4. This Chapter does not apply to:
(a) government procurement;
(b) subsidies or grants provided by a Party;

(c) any taxation measure, except under Article 7.11 and Article

' For greater certainty, the Parties understand that an investor that “is seeking to make” an
investment refers to an investor of a Party that has taken active steps to initiate a notification
or approval process, where applicable, for making an investment.

7.12;

(d) services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority
such as law enforcement, correctional services, income
security or insurance, social security or insurance, social
welfare, public education, public training, health, and child
care, provided that such services are supplied neither on a
commercial basis, nor in competition with one or more
service suppliers; or

(e) measures adopted or maintained by a Party to the extent that
they are covered by Chapter Six (Trade in Services).

5. Notwithstanding paragraph 4(e), Article 7.6, Article 7.7, Article 7.11,
Article 7.12", Article 7.13, and Article 7.19 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to
any measure affecting the supply of service by a service supplier of a Party
through commercial presence™ in the territory of the other Party pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter Six (Trade in Services), only to the extent that they
constitute a covered investment.”

Article 7.3: Relations to Other Chapters

1. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another
Chapter, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

2. A requirement by a Party that a service supplier of the other Party
post a bond or other form of financial security as a condition of the cross-
border supply of a service does not of itself make this Chapter applicable to
measures adopted or maintained by the Party relating to such cross-border
supply of the service. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained
by the Party relating to the posted bond or financial security, to the extent that
such bond or financial security is a covered investment.

3. This Chapter does not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a
Party to the extent that they are covered by Chapter Six (Trade in Services).

Article 7.4: National Treatment

'8 For greater certainty, Annex 7-B applies to Article 7.12.

'‘ For greater certainty, commercial presence shall have the same meaning as that in Chapter
Six (Trade in Services).

'’ For greater certainty, this paragraph shall not be interpreted as extending the scope and
coverage of application of Article 7.19.

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party, and to covered
investments of investors of the other Party, treatment no less favourable than
that it accords, in like circumstances, © to its own investors and investments
with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management,
conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments in its territory.

2. The treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraph | means,
with respect to a regional level of government, treatment no less favourable
than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by that
regional level of government to investors, and to investments of investors, of
the Party of which it forms a part.

Article 7.5: Most-favoured-Nation Treatment!”

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no
less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors of any
non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation and sale or other disposition of investments
in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments in its
territory of investors of any non-Party with respect to the establishment,
acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation and sale or other
disposition of investments.

3. For greater certainty, the treatment referred to in this Article does not
encompass international dispute resolution procedures or mechanisms, such as
those included in Article 7.19.

Article 7.6: Treatment of Investment!®

1. Each Party shall accord to covered investments fair and equitable
treatment and full protection and security, in accordance with customary
international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens.

'° For greater certainty, whether the treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under
Article 7.4 or Article 7.5 depends on the totality of the circumstances including, but not
limited to, whether the relevant treatment distinguishes between investors or investments on
the basis of legitimate public welfare objectives.

'’ For greater certainty, Article 7.5 shall not apply to investor-state dispute settlement
mechanisms such as those set out in Article 7.19.

'8 Article 7.6 shall be interpreted in accordance with Annex 7-A.

7-5

2. For greater certainty:

(a) fair and equitable treatment requires each Party not to deny
justice in any legal or administrative proceedings;

(b) full protection and security require each Party to take such
measures as may be reasonably necessary to ensure the
physical protection and security of the covered investment;
and

(c) the concepts of “fair and equitable treatment” and “full
protection and security” do not require treatment to covered
investments in addition to or beyond that which is required
under customary international law minimum standard of
treatment of aliens, and do not create additional substantive
rights.

3. A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of
this Agreement, or of a separate international agreement, does not establish
that there has been a breach of this Article.

Article 7.7: Compensation for Losses

1. A Party shall accord to investors of the other Party whose covered
investment suffered losses due to war or other armed conflict, state of national
emergency, riot or other civil strife, treatment no less favourable than that
accorded, in like circumstances, to its own investors or investors of a non-
Party whichever is more favourable, relating to restitution, indemnification,
compensation or any other forms of settlement.

2. An investor of a Party who in any of the events referred to in
paragraph | suffers loss resulting from:

(a) requisitioning of its investment or part thereof by the forces or
authorities of the other Party; or

(b) destruction of its investment or part thereof by the forces or
authorities of the other Party, which was not required by the
necessity of the situation;

shall in any case be accorded by the latter Party restitution or compensation
which in either case shall be prompt, adequate and effective and, with respect to
compensation, shall be accordance with Article 7.12.

Article 7.8: Performance Requirements ’”7”"”!

1. Neither Party shall impose or enforce any of the following
requirements, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation, or sale or other disposition of an investment
in its territory of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party:

(a) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

(b) to purchase, use, or accord a preference to goods produced in
its territory, or to purchase goods from persons in its territory;

(c) to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the
volume or value of exports or to the amount of foreign
exchange inflows associated with investments of the investor;

(d) to restrict sales of goods in its territory that such investment
of the investor produces or provides by relating such sales in
any way to the volume or value of its exports or foreign
exchange earnings;

(e) to export a given level or percentage of goods;

(f) to transfer a particular technology, a production process, or
other proprietary knowledge to a person in its territory; or

(g) to supply exclusively from the territory of the Party the goods
that such investment produces to a specific regional market or
to the world market.

2. Paragraph 1 does not preclude either Party from conditioning the
receipt or continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with the
establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, or sale
or other disposition of an investment in its territory of an investor of a Party or
of a non-Party, on compliance with any of the requirements set forth in
subparagraphs 1(e) through (g).

Article 7.9: Senior Management and Boards of Directors

'? This Article shall not preclude enforcement of any requirement between private parties, if a
Party did not impose the requirement. For purposes of this Article, private parties include
designated monopolies or state enterprises, if such entities are not exercising delegated
governmental authority.

°° For greater certainty, paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to any requirement other than those
set out in those paragraphs.

*! This Article shall not be subject to Article 7.19.

7-7

1. A Party shall not require an enterprise of that Party that is a covered
investment appoint to senior management positions natural persons of any
particular nationality.

2. A Party may require that a majority of the board of directors, or any
committee thereof, of an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment,
be of a particular nationality, or resident in the territory of the Party, provided
that the requirement does not materially impair the ability of the investor to
exercise control over its investment.

Article 7.10: Non-Conforming Measures

1. Articles 7.4, Article 7.5, Article 7.8, and Article 7.9 shall not apply
to:
(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a
Party at:
(1) the central level of government as set out by that

Party in its Schedule to Annex J;

(11) a regional level of government as set out by that Party
in its Schedule to Annex I; or

(iii) a local level of government”;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming
measure referred to in subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a) to the extent that the amendment does not
decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed at the
date of entry into force of the Party’s Schedule to Annex I
with Article 7.4, Article 7.5, Article 7.8, and Article 7.9.

2. Article 7.4, Article 7.5, Article 7.8, and Article 7.9 shall not apply to
any measures that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, sub-
sectors or activities, as set out in its Schedule to Annex II.

3. Neither Party may, under any measure adopted after the date of entry
into force of this Agreement and covered by its Schedule to Annex II, require

*° For Korea, local level of government means a local government as defined in the Local
Autonomy Act.

an investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise
dispose of an investment existing at the time the measure becomes effective
and, where applicable, unless otherwise specified in the initial approval by the
relevant authorities.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed so as to derogate from
rights and obligations under international agreements in respect of protection
of intellectual property rights to which the Parties are party, including the
TRIPS Agreement and other treaties concluded under the auspices of the
World Intellectual Property Organisation.

Article 7.11: Transfers”
1. Each Party shall permit all transfers relating to a covered investment to
be made freely and without delay into and out of its territory. Such transfers shall

include:

(a) the initial capital and additional amounts to maintain or
increase an investment;

(b) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments,
license fees, technical assistance fees, management fees and

other current income accruing from any covered investment;

(c) proceeds from the total or partial sale or liquidation of all or
any part of the covered investment;

(d) payments made under a contract, including a loan agreement;
(e) payments made pursuant to Article 7.7 and Article 7.12; and
(f) payments arising out of the settlement of a dispute.
2. Each Party shall permit transfers relating to a covered investment to
be made in a freely usable currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing
at the time of transfer.
3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent a transfer
through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith application of its

laws and regulations relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency, or the protection of the rights of
creditors;

°3 For greater certainty, Annex 7-C applies to this Article.

(b)

issuing, trading, or dealing in securities, futures, options, or
derivatives;

(c) criminal or penal offences;

(d) ensuring compliance with the judgments in judicial or
administrative proceedings;

(e) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers including
capital movements and payments when necessary to assist law
enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;

(f) taxation; or

(g) severance entitlement of employees.

Article 7.12: Expropriation and Compensation
l. A Party shall not nationalise or expropriate covered investments of an

investor of the other Party, either directly or through measures equivalent to
expropriation or nationalisation (referred hereto as “expropriation’’), except:

(a) for public purpose;

(b) in accordance with due process of law;

(c) on a non-discriminatory basis; and

(d) upon payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation.

2. For purposes of paragraph 1(d), compensation shall:

(a) be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated
investment at the time when the expropriation was publicly
announced, or immediately before or when the expropriation
occurred, whichever is applicable;™

(b) not reflect any change in value occurring because the intended

expropriation had become known earlier;

** Where there is a dispute about whether a government conduct amounts to indirect
expropriation within the meaning of this Article, the fact that compensation has not been paid
while that dispute remains unresolved does not render that conduct inherently unlawful if it is
subsequently found to constitute indirect expropriation within the meaning of this Article.

7-10

(c) be settled and paid without undue delay”; and

(d) be effectively realisable and freely transferable between the
territories of the Parties.

3. The compensation referred to in paragraph 1(d) shall include
appropriate interest.

4. This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses
granted in relation to intellectual property rights under the TRIPS Agreement.

Article 7.13: Subrogation

l. If a Party or designated agency of a Party makes a payment to an
investor of that Party under a guarantee, a contract of insurance or other form
of indemnity it has granted on non-commercial risk in respect of a covered
investment, the other Party in whose territory the covered investment was
made shall recognise the subrogation or transfer of any rights the investor
would have possessed under this Chapter with respect to the covered
investment but for the subrogation, and the investor shall be precluded from
pursuing these rights to the extent of the subrogation.

2. The subrogated or transferred right or claim shall not be greater than
the original right or claim of the investor. 6

Article 7.14: Special Formalities and Treatment of Information

1. Nothing in Article 7.4 shall be construed to prevent a Party from
adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities in
connection with establishment of investments by investors of the other Party,
such as the requirement that investments be legally constituted under the laws
or regulations of the Party and compliance with registration requirements,
provided that such formalities do not materially impair the rights afforded by a
Party to investors of the other Party and investments of investors of the other
Party pursuant to this Agreement.

°° The Parties understand that there may be legal and administrative processes that need to be
observed before payment can be made.

°° This, however, does not necessarily imply recognition of the latter Party of the merits of any
case or the amount of any claims arising therefrom.

2. Notwithstanding Article 7.4 and Article 7.5, a Party may require an
investor of the other Party, or its investment in its territory, to provide routine
information concerning that investment solely for information or statistical
purposes. The Party shall protect any confidential information which has been
provided from any disclosure that would prejudice legitimate commercial
interests of the investor and its covered investment, or the competitive position
of the investor or the covered investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be
construed to prevent a Party from otherwise obtaining or disclosing
information in connection with the equitable and good faith application of its
law.

Article 7.15: Denial of Benefits

A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter:

(a) to an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of the
other Party and to investments of that investor if:

(1) persons of a non-Party, or of the denying Party own
or control the enterprise; and

(11) the enterprise has no substantial business activities in
the territory of the other Party;

(b) to an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of the
other Party and to investments of that investor if:

(1) persons of a non-Party own or control the enterprise;
and
(11) the denying Party adopts or maintains measures with

respect to the non-Party or a person of the non-Party
that prohibit transactions with the enterprise or that
would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of
this Chapter were accorded to the enterprise or to its
investments; or

(c) to an investor of the other Party if a person of a non-Party

owns or controls the enterprise and the denying Party does not
maintain diplomatic relations with that non-Party.

Article 7.16: Environmental Measures

Each Party recognises that it is inappropriate to encourage investments by
investors by relaxing its environmental measures. To this effect, each Party
should not waive or otherwise derogate from such environmental measures as
an encouragement for establishment, acquisition or expansion of investments
in its territory.

Article 7.17: Investment Promotion
The Parties recognise the importance of promoting cross-border investment
and technology flows as a means for achieving economic growth and

development through, inter alia:

(a) identifying investment opportunities and _ providing
information on investment regulations;

(b) sharing of experiences and best practices on investment
promotion;
(c) the furthering of a legal environment conducive to increased

investment flows; and

(d) developing investments partnership, in particular with small
and medium enterprises.

Article 7.18: Corporate Social Responsibility

Each Party reaffirms the importance of encouraging enterprises operating
within its territory to voluntarily incorporate into their internal policies those
internationally recognised standards, guidelines, and principles of corporate
social responsibility that have been endorsed or are supported by that Party.

Article 7.19: Investor-State Dispute Settlement

1. This Article shall apply to investment disputes between a Party and
an investor of the other Party concerning an alleged breach of Article 7.4,
Article 7.5, Article 7.6, Article 7.7, Article 7.9, Article 7.11 and Article
7.12which causes loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach to:

(a) the investor in relation to its covered investments; or
(b) the covered investment that has been made by that investor,

relating to the management, conduct, operation or sale or other
disposition of a covered investment.

2. An investment may not make a claim under this Article.

3. Without prejudice to the scope of any applicable exceptions, non-
conforming measures, principles of international law or the disputing Party’s
ability to rely on such exceptions, non-conforming measures or principles of
international law during the proceedings, no claim may be brought under this
Article:

(a) in relation to an alleged breach of Most-favoured-Nation
treatment as referred to in Article 7.5 on the basis that another
international agreement contains more favourable rights or
obligations. For greater certainty, this shall not prevent a claim
challenging measures of a Party, including measures taken
pursuant to another international agreement, on the basis that
those measures breach Article 7.5 and have resulted in loss or
damage to the disputing investor;

(b) in relation to a measure that is designed and implemented to
protect or promote public health;”’

(c) in relation to an investment that has been established through
illegal conduct including fraudulent misrepresentation,
concealment or corruption. For greater certainty, this exclusion
does not apply to investments established through minor or
technical breaches of law;

(d) in relation to investment disputes which have occurred prior to
the entry into force of this Agreement;

(e) if the claim is frivolous or manifestly without merit;
(f) by a natural person possessing the nationality or citizenship of
a disputing Party.
4. In the event of an investment dispute arising under this Article, the

disputing parties shall as far as possible resolve the dispute through
consultation and negotiation, a request of which shall be made in writing, with
a view towards reaching an amicable settlement.

5. The written request for consultations shall contain information
regarding the legal and factual basis for the investment dispute, including the
name and address of the disputing investor, the provisions of this Agreement

°’ For Indonesia, measures include those comprising or relating to the Indonesia Health
Service Scheme.

alleged to have been breached, the relief sought and the estimated amount of
damages claimed, and evidence establishing that the claimant is an investor of
the other Party and that it owns or controls the investments.

6. In the case that consultations take place in accordance with this
Article, the consultations shall commence, unless the disputing parties agree to
a longer period, within 60 days of the submission of the request for
consultations. The place of consultation shall be Seoul where the disputing
Party is Korea or Jakarta where the disputing Party is Indonesia.

7. If the dispute cannot be resolved within 180 days from the receipt by
the disputing Party of the written request for consultations, the disputing Party
may initiate a mediation process, which shall be mandatory for the disputing
investor, with a view towards reaching an amicable settlement. Such a
mediation process shall be initiated by a written request delivered by the
disputing Party to the disputing investor.

8. The mediation process under this Article can only be initiated by a
written request delivered by the disputing Party within 180 days from the
receipt by the disputing Party of the written request for consultations.

9. Expenses incurred in relation to the mediation process shall be borne
equally by the disputing parties. Each disputing party shall bear its own legal
expenses.

10. Any such dispute which has not been resolved by consultations in
accordance with paragraph 5 and paragraph 6 or by mediation in accordance
with paragraph 7 to paragraph 9 may be submitted to the courts or
administrative tribunals of the disputing Party provided that such courts or
tribunals have jurisdictions over such claims or to arbitration. In the latter
event, the investor has the choice among any of the following:

(a) the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings, provided that both the disputing
Party and the non-disputing Party are parties to the ICSID
Convention;

(b) the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that either the
disputing Party or the non-disputing Party, but not both, is a
party to the ICSID Convention;

(c) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; or

(d) any other arbitration institution or any other arbitration rules,
if the disputing parties so agree.

11. The applicable arbitration rules shall govern the arbitration set forth
in paragraph 10 unless they are modified by this Article.

12. Once the investor has submitted the dispute to either the courts or
administrative tribunals of the disputing Party or any of the arbitration
mechanisms provided for in paragraph 10, the choice of forum shall be final.

13. The submission of a dispute to arbitration under paragraph 10 shall be
conditional upon:

(a)

(b)

the submission of the dispute to such arbitration taking place
within three years and six months of the time at which the
disputing investor become aware, or should reasonably have
become aware, of a breach of an obligation under this
Agreement and, of the loss or damage incurred by the
disputing investor in relation to its covered investment or by
the covered investment;

the disputing investor providing written notice, which shall be
delivered at least 90 days before the claim to arbitration is
submitted, to the disputing Party of its intent to submit the
dispute to such arbitration and which:

(1) states the name and address of the disputing investor
and the covered investment;

(11) nominates one of the fora in paragraph 10(a), (b), (c),
or (d) as the forum for dispute settlement;

(111) waives its right to initiate any proceedings, before
any of the other dispute settlement procedures
referred to in paragraph 10 in relation to the matter
under dispute; and

(iv) briefly summaries the alleged breach of the disputing
Party under this Agreement (including the articles
alleged to have been breached) and the loss or
damage allegedly caused to the investor in relation to
its covered investment or caused to the covered
investment; or

the disputing parties spending at least 120 days on that process
and the disputing investor providing written notice, which
shall be delivered at least 60 days before the claim to
arbitration is submitted, to the disputing Party of its intent to
submit the dispute to such arbitration and which specifies the

information referred to paragraph 13(b), should the disputing
Party initiate a mediation process in accordance with
paragraph 7.

14. Notwithstanding paragraph 13(b), the disputing investor may initiate
or continue an action that seeks interim injunctive relief and does not involve
the payment of monetary damages or resolution of the substance of the matter
in dispute before a court or administrative tribunals of the disputing Party,
provided that the action is brought for the sole purpose of preserving the
disputing investor’s rights and interests during the pendency of the arbitration.

15. An investor of a Party may not initiate or continue a claim under this
Article if a claim involving the same measure or measures alleged to constitute
a breach under paragraph | and arising from the same events or circumstances
is initiated or continued pursuant to an agreement between the disputing Party
and a non-Party by:

(a) a person of a non-Party that owns or controls, directly or
indirectly, the investor of a Party; or

(b) a person of a non-Party that is owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by the investor of a Party.

16. Each Party consents to the submission of a claim to arbitration under
this Article in accordance with this Agreement. The consent and the
submission of a claim to arbitration under this Article shall be deemed to
satisfy the requirement of:

(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the
Centre) and the ICSID Additional Facility Rules for written
consent of the parties to the dispute; and

(b) Article II of the New York Convention for an “agreement in
writing”.

17. The arbitral tribunal established under paragraph 10 shall decide the
issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement, any relevant rules of
international law applicable in the relations between the Parties and, if
applicable, any relevant domestic law of the disputing Party when it is relevant
to the claim as a matter of fact.

18. If issues relating to jurisdiction or admissibility are raised as
preliminary objections, the tribunal shall decide the matter before proceeding
to the merits. The disputing parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
present their views and observations to the tribunal. If the tribunal decides that
the claim is manifestly without merit, or is otherwise not within the

jurisdiction or competence of the tribunal, it shall render an award to that
effect.

19. Unless the disputing parties otherwise agree, the arbitral tribunal shall
comprise three arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each of the disputing
parties and the third, who shall be the presiding arbitrator, appointed by
agreement of the disputing parties. If a tribunal has not been constituted within
75 days from the date a claim is submitted to arbitration under this Article, the
Appointing Authority’, at the request of a disputing party, shall appoint, in his
or her discretion, the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed. The
Appointing Authority shall not appoint a national of either Party as the
presiding arbitrator, unless the disputing parties otherwise agree.

20. Arbitrators shall have expertise or experience in public international
law, international trade or international investment rules and be independent of,
and not be affiliated with or take instructions from the disputing Party, the
non-disputing Party or disputing investor.

21. For purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of
Schedule C to the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to
an objection to an arbitrator on a ground other than nationality:

(a) the disputing Party agrees to the appointment of each
individual member of a tribunal established under the ICSID
Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules;

(b) the disputing investor may submit a claim to arbitration under
this Article, or continue a claim, under the ICSID Convention
or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only on condition that
the disputing investor agrees in writing to the appointment of
each individual member of the tribunal.

22. Unless the disputing parties otherwise agree, the tribunal shall
determine the place of arbitration in accordance with the applicable arbitration
rules, provided that the place shall be in the territory of a State that is a party
to the New York Convention.

23. Subject to subparagraphs (a) and (b), the disputing parties shall make
publicly available all awards and decisions produced by the tribunal.

°8 Appointing Authority means:
(1) in the case of arbitration under Article 7.5, the Secretary General of ICSID;
(11) in the case of arbitration under Article 7.5, the Secretary General of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration; or
(111) any person as agreed between the disputing parties.

(a) Any of the disputing parties that intend to use information
designated as confidential information in a hearing shall so
advise the tribunal. The tribunal shall make appropriate
arrangements to protect the information from disclosure.

(b) Any information specifically designated as confidential that is
submitted to the tribunal or the disputing parties shall be
protected from disclosure to the public.

24. A disputing party may disclose to persons directly connected with the
arbitral proceeding such confidential information as it considers necessary for
the preparation of its case, but it shall require such confidential information is
protected.

25. The tribunal shall not require a Party to furnish or allow access to
information the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement or would
be contrary to the Party’s law or which it determines to be contrary to its
essential security.

26. The non-disputing Party shall be entitled, at its cost, to receive from
the disputing Party a copy of the notice of arbitration, no later than 30 days
after the date that such document has been delivered to the disputing Party.
The disputing Party shall notify the other Party of the receipt of the notice of
arbitration within 30 days thereof.

27. The disputing Party may not assert as a defence, counter-claim, right
of set-off or for any other reason, that the disputing investor has received or
will receive indemnification or other compensation for all or part of the
alleged damages pursuant to an insurance or guarantee contract, except with
respect to any subrogation as provided for in Article 7.13.

28. If a tribunal makes a final award against either of the disputing parties,
the tribunal may award, separately or in combination only:

(a) monetary damages and any applicable interest; and

(b) restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide
that the disputing Party may pay monetary damages and any
applicable interest in lieu of restitution.

29. A tribunal may also award costs and attorney’s fees in accordance
with this Article and the applicable arbitration rules.

30. A Party shall not give diplomatic protection, or bring an international
claim, in respect of a dispute which one of its investors and the other Party
have submitted to arbitration under this Article, unless the other Party has

failed to abide by and comply with the award rendered in such dispute.
Diplomatic protection, for purposes of this paragraph, shall not include
informal diplomatic exchanges for the sole purpose of facilitating a settlement
of the dispute.

31. An award made by a tribunal shall be final and binding upon the
disputing parties. An award shall have no binding force except between the
disputing parties and in respect of the particular case.

32. Subject to paragraph 33 and the applicable review procedure for an
interim award, a disputing party shall abide by and comply with an award
without delay.

33. A disputing party shall not seek enforcement of a final award until:
(a) in the case of a final award made under the ICSID Convention,

(1) 120 days have elapsed from the date the award was
rendered and no disputing party has requested
revision or annulment of the award; or

(11) revision or annulment proceedings have been
completed; or

(b) in the case of a final award under the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules, the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, or the rules
selected pursuant to paragraph 10(d),

(1) 90 days have elapsed from the date the award was
rendered and no disputing party has commenced a
proceeding to revise, set aside, or annul the award;

or
(ii) a court has dismissed or allowed an application to
revise, set aside, or annul the award and there is no
further appeal.
34. Each Party shall provide for the enforcement of an award in its

territory.

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC COOPERATION

Article 8.1: Basic Principles

1. Recognising the importance of economic cooperation under this
Agreement, the Parties shall promote cooperation in areas of mutual interest,
taking into account the different levels of development and capacity of the
Parties. Special focus should be given to building capacity which will
enhance economic complementarities to deepen and expand the Parties’ roles
in regional and global value chains.

2. To promote and facilitate the implementation of economic cooperation
under this Agreement, the Parties shall undertake coordination between their
respective governments and, where necessary and appropriate, encourage and
facilitate cooperation where one or both sides are entities other than the
governments of the Parties. Based on mutual benefits of the Parties towards
the cooperative sectors in which the Parties have mutual interests, the Parties
will cooperate on appropriate forms of activities.

3. Reaffirming the value of ongoing economic cooperation initiatives
between the Parties, the Parties shall respect and continue their existing
economic cooperation under frameworks other than this Agreement and shall
ensure that there will be no duplication of work or activities.

4. The Parties acknowledge the provisions to encourage and facilitate
economic cooperation as provided for in this Agreement in accordance with
their respective domestic laws and regulations.

Article 8.2: Sectors for Cooperation

1. The Parties, on the basis of mutual benefits, shall explore and
undertake cooperative activities.

2. Sectors related to industry may include:
(a) automotive;
(b) steel and metal;
(c) chemicals;

(d) information and communication technology;

8-1

(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(i)
(k)

electronics;

machinery;

garment, textiles and apparel;
ships;

aircrafts;

food and beverages; and

other sectors of cooperation as may be agreed by the Parties.

Sectors related to agriculture, fishery and forestry may include:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)
(f)

livestock and crop production;

improvement of investment conditions in the fields of
fisheries and forestry;

satisfying the needs of investors in fisheries and forestry
sectors in accordance with each Party’s relevant domestic
laws and regulations;

forest management;

agro-based and food processing; and

other sectors of cooperation as may be agreed by the Parties.

Sectors related to rules and procedures for trade may include:

(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)
(f)

standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures;

sanitary and phytosanitary;
customs procedures;

rules of origin and other aspects of implementation of tariff
commitments;

intellectual property; and

other sectors of cooperation as may be agreed by the Parties.

8-2

5. Sectors related to movement of natural persons (MNP) may include:

(a) Professionals; and
(b) Trainee.
6. Other areas for cooperation may include:
(a) supporting policy for small and medium-sized enterprises;
(b) statistics;
(c) fair competition;
(d) infrastructure;
(e) investment;
(f) science, technology and innovation;
(g) culture and other creative areas;
(h) energy and mineral resources;
(1) health care;
(j) environment;
(k) construction service; and
(1) other sectors of cooperation as may be agreed by the Parties.

Article 8.3: Forms of Cooperation

The forms of economic cooperation may include, but are not limited to:

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

technical assistance;
training of human resources;
exchange of data and information;

exchange of experts;

8-3

(e) thematic seminar and workshop;

(f) design and improvement of institutions;
(g) formulation of sectoral master plan;

(h) formulation of development strategy;
(i) sharing of best practices;

(j) base study;

(k) joint research and development;

(1) joint trade and investment promotion activities;
(m) model and technology transfer; and

(n) other forms of cooperation as may be agreed by the Parties.

Article 8.4: Implementation

1. The cooperation shall be implemented in accordance with each Party’s
domestic laws and regulations.

2. For purposes of the effective implementation and operation of this
Chapter, the Parties hereby establish a Committee on Economic Cooperation
(hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”) and conclude an Implementing
Arrangement setting out the functions and procedures of the Committee,
building upon and complementing existing bilateral economic cooperation
projects, initiatives and activities.

3. The Parties shall undertake cooperation projects according to their
priority at mutually agreed periods of time. The projects shall be monitored
and reviewed by the Committee to ensure their effective implementation to
meet their intended objectives.

4. Taking into account the different levels of development and capacity,
the Parties shall contribute appropriately to the cost of implementation based

on a mutual understanding or agreement.

5. Funding for implementation of cooperation sectors shall be set out in
detail in the implementing arrangement.

8-4

Article 8.5: Resources for Economic Cooperation

1. The Parties shall cooperate to adopt the most effective means for the
implementation of this Chapter.

2. The Parties shall endeavour to make available necessary financial and
other resources for the implementation of economic cooperation under this
Chapter in accordance with their respective domestic laws and regulations.

3. Funding for economic cooperation under this Chapter shall be borne
according to mutual agreement, taking into account the different levels of
development of the Parties.

Article 8.6: Dispute Settlement
Neither Party shall have recourse to Chapter Ten (Dispute Settlement) for any
matter arising under this Chapter. Any dispute between the Parties

concerning interpretation and implementation of this implementing
arrangement shall be settled through consultation amicably.

8-5

CHAPTER 9
TRANSPARENCY

Article 9.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:

administrative ruling of general application means an administrative ruling
or interpretation that applies to all persons and fact situations that fall
generally within its ambit and that establishes a norm of conduct, but does not
include:

(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative
proceeding that applies to a particular person, good, or
service of the other Party in a specific case; or

(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or
practice.

Article 9.2: Publication

1. Each Party shall ensure that its domestic laws, regulations,
procedures and administrative rulings of general application relating to any
matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published or otherwise made
publicly available.

2. To the extent possible, each Party, in accordance with its domestic
laws and regulations, shall:

(a) publish in advance any measures referred to in paragraph
1 that it proposes to adopt; and

(b) provide interested persons and the other Party with a
reasonable opportunity to comment on such proposed
measures

Article 9.3: Provision of Information
Upon request of a Party, the other Party shall promptly provide information
and respond to questions pertaining to any actual or proposed measure referred

to in Article 9.2 that the requesting Party considers might affect the operation
of this Agreement.

9-1

Article 9.4: Administrative Proceedings

With a view to administering in a consistent, impartial and reasonable manner
its domestic laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of
general application relating to any matter covered by this Agreement, each
Party shall ensure, in its administrative proceedings, in which these measures
are applied to particular persons, goods or services of the other Party in
specific cases, that:

(a) wherever possible, in accordance with its applicable
domestic laws and regulations, persons of the other Party
that are directly affected by a proceeding are provided
reasonable notice, when a proceeding is_ initiated,
including a description of the nature of the proceeding, a
statement of the legal authority under which the
proceeding is initiated, and a general description of any
issues in controversy;

(b) persons of the other Party that are directly affected by a
proceeding are afforded a reasonable opportunity to
present facts and arguments in support of their positions
prior to any final administrative action, when time, the
nature of the proceeding, and the public interest permit;
and

(c) its procedures are in accordance with its domestic laws
and regulations.

Article 9.5: Review and Appeal

1. In accordance with its domestic laws and regulations, each Party
shall establish or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial or administrative tribunals or
procedures for the purposes of the prompt review and, where warranted,
correction of administrative actions relating to any matter covered by this
Agreement. Such tribunals shall be impartial and independent of the office
or authority entrusted with administrative enforcement and shall not have any
substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, in such tribunals or procedures, the
parties to the proceeding are provided with the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their
respective positions; and

9-2

(b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions of
record or, where required by its domestic laws and
regulations the record compiled by the administrative
authority.

3. The decision in subparagraph 2(b) shall, subject to appeal or further
review as provided for in its domestic laws and regulations, be implemented
by the authority entrusted with administrative enforcement.

9-3

CHAPTER 10
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
Article 10.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:
arbitration panel means a panel established under Article 10.7;

arbitrator means a member of an arbitration panel established under Article
10.7;

candidate means an individual who is under consideration for appointment as
the third arbitrator under Article 10.9;

complaining Party means a Party that requests the establishment of an
arbitration panel under Article 10.7;

Party complained against means the Party that is alleged to be in violation of
this Agreement, as referred to in Article 10.3; and

proceeding, unless otherwise specified, means an arbitration panel proceeding
under this Chapter.

Article 10.2: Objective

1. The objective of this Chapter is to provide an effective, efficient, and
transparent process for the avoidance or settlement of disputes arising under
this Agreement.

2. The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation
and application of this Agreement, and shall make every attempt through
cooperation and consultations to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of
any matter raised in accordance with this Chapter.

Article 10.3: Scope

Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement or agreed by the
Parties, this Chapter shall apply:

(a) with respect to the avoidance or settlement of all disputes
between the Parties regarding the interpretation and

application of this Agreement; or

10-1

(b) wherever a Party considers that:

(1) a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with
its obligations under this Agreement; or

(11) the other Party has otherwise failed to carry out
its obligations under this Agreement.

Article 10.4: Choice of Forum

1. Where a dispute regarding any matter arises under this Agreement
and under the WTO Agreement or any other agreement to which both Parties
are party, the complaining Party may select the forum in which to settle the
dispute.

2. Once the complaining Party has requested the establishment of, or
referred a matter to, a dispute settlement panel under an agreement referred to
in paragraph 1, the forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of other fora,
unless the forum selected fails for procedural or jurisdictional reasons to
initiate a dispute settlement proceeding.

Article 10.5: Consultations

1. Each Party may request consultations with respect to any matter
arising under this Agreement, pursuant to Article 10.3.

2. A request for consultations shall be submitted in writing and shall
give the reasons for the request, including the identification of the specific
measure or other matter at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the
complaint.

3. If a request for consultations is made, the Party complained against
shall reply within 10 days of the date of the receipt of the request. The Parties
shall enter into consultations in good faith within 30 days of the date of receipt
of the request with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory solution.
Consultations shall take place, unless the Parties otherwise agree, in the
territory of the Party complained against.

4. In cases of urgency, including those concerning perishable goods, the
Parties shall enter into consultations within 15 days of the date of receipt of

the request by the Party complained against.

5. Upon initiation of consultations, the Parties shall provide information
to enable the examination of how the measure at issue might affect the

10-2

interpretation and application of this Agreement, and give confidential
treatment to the information exchanged during consultations.

6. Consultations under this Article shall be confidential and without
prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further proceedings under this
Agreement or other proceedings.

Article 10.6: Good Offices, Conciliation or Mediation

1. Good offices, conciliation or mediation may be requested at any time
by either Party. They may begin at any time by agreement of both Parties and
be terminated at any time upon request of either Party.

2. If the Parties agree, good offices, conciliation, or mediation may
continue while the proceedings of the arbitration panel provided for in this
Chapter are in progress.

3. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation or mediation, and in
particular, positions taken by both Parties during these proceedings, shall be
confidential, and without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further
proceedings under this Agreement or other proceedings.

Article 10.7: Establishment of the Arbitration Panel

1. The complaining Party that made a request for consultations under
Article 10.5 may request in writing the establishment of an arbitration panel to
the Party complained against,

(a) if the Party complained against does not enter into such
consultations within 30 days, or within 15 days in cases of
urgency including those concerning perishable goods, of the
date of receipt of the request for such consultations in
accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 10.5; or

(b) if the Parties fail to resolve the dispute through such
consultations within 60 days, or within 30 days in cases of
urgency including those concerning perishable goods, of the
date of receipt of the request for such consultations.

2. The request for the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be made
in writing to the Party complained against. The complaining Party shall
identify in its request, the measure or other matter at issue, and the factual and
legal basis for the complaint sufficient to present the problem clearly.

10-3

Article 10.8: Terms of Reference of the Arbitration Panel

1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise within five days after the date of
establishment of the panel, the terms of reference of the arbitration panel shall
be:

“To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement,
the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of an
arbitration panel pursuant to Article 10.7, and to make findings of law
and fact together with the reasons for the resolution of the dispute,
conclusions, and recommendations”.

2. If the Parties agree on other terms of reference, they shall notify the
agreed terms of reference to the panel within the time period set out in
paragraph 1.

Article 10.9: Composition of the Arbitration Panel

1. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, an arbitration panel shall
consist of three arbitrators.

2. Each Party shall appoint one arbitrator who may be its national and
propose up to three candidates to serve as the third arbitrator who shall be the
chair of the arbitration panel within 30 days of the date of receipt of the
request for the establishment of the arbitration panel. The Parties shall
endeavour to agree on and appoint the third arbitrator who shall serve as the
chair of the arbitration panel within 45 days of the date of receipt of the
request for the establishment of the arbitration panel, taking into account the
candidates proposed. If the Parties fail to agree on and appoint the third
arbitrator within 45 days, the Parties shall meet within seven days and select
the chair by lot from the list of candidates proposed by both Parties.

3. The candidates for the third arbitrator referred to in paragraph 2 shall
not be nationals of either Party, nor have their usual place of residence in
either Party, nor be employed by either Party, nor have dealt with the dispute
in any capacity.

4. The date of the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be the date
on which the third arbitrator is appointed.

5. All arbitrators shall have expertise or experience in law, international
trade or other matters relating to this Agreement, or in the resolution of

disputes arising under international trade agreements. Each arbitrator shall

10-4

be independent, serve in his or her individual capacities and not be affiliated
with, nor take instructions from, either Party or organisation related to the
dispute, and shall comply with Annex 10-B.

6. Where a Party considers that an arbitrator does not comply with the
requirements of Annex 10-B, the Parties shall consult and replace, if so agreed,
that arbitrator in accordance with paragraph 7.

7. If an arbitrator appointed under this Article resigns or becomes unable
to participate in the proceedings, or is to be replaced according to paragraph 6,
a successor shall be selected within 15 days in accordance with the
appointment method provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3, mutatis mutandis.
The successor shall have all the powers and duties of the original arbitrator.
The work of the arbitration panel shall be suspended for a period beginning on
the date the arbitrator resigns or becomes unable to participate in the
proceeding, or is to be replaced according to paragraph 6. The work of the
arbitration panel shall resume on the date the successor is appointed.

Article 10.10: Proceedings of the Arbitration Panel

1. The arbitration panel shall meet in closed sessions. The Parties shall
be present at the meetings only when invited by the arbitration panel to appear
before it.

2. The Parties shall be given the opportunity to provide at least one
written submission and to attend any of the presentations, statements or
rebuttals in the proceedings. All information provided or written submissions
made by a Party to the arbitration panel, including any comments on the
interim report and responses to questions put by the arbitration panel, shall be
made available to the other Party.

3. A Party asserting that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent
with this Agreement shall have the burden of establishing such inconsistency.
A Party asserting that a measure is subject to an exception under this
Agreement shall have the burden of establishing that the exception applies.

4. The arbitration panel should consult with the Parties as appropriate
and provide adequate opportunities for the development of a mutually
satisfactory resolution.

5. The arbitration panel shall interpret this Agreement in accordance
with the customary rules of interpretation of public international laws, taking
due account of the interpretation adopted by the Parties.

6. The arbitration panel shall aim to make its decisions, including its

10-5

reports, by consensus but may also make its decisions, including its report, by
majority vote.

7. The arbitration panel shall provide the Parties with a copy of any
advice or opinion obtained from any relevant source or experts and an
opportunity to provide comments.

8. The deliberations of the arbitration panel and the documents
submitted to it shall be kept confidential.

9. Notwithstanding paragraph 8, either Party may make _ public
statements as to its views regarding the dispute, but shall treat as confidential
information and written submissions delivered by the other Party to the
arbitration panel which the other Party has designated as confidential. Where a
Party has provided information or written submissions designated to be
confidential, that Party shall upon request of the other Party, provide a non-
confidential summary of the information or written submissions which may be
disclosed publicly.

10. The reports of the arbitration panel shall be drafted without the
presence of the Parties. The arbitration panel shall base its report on the
relevant provisions of this Agreement, and the submissions and arguments of
the Parties, and may take into account any other relevant information provided
to the arbitration panel.

11. The reports of the arbitration panel shall contain both the descriptive
parts summarising the submissions or arguments of the Parties, and the
findings and determinations of the arbitration panel. If the Parties agree, the
arbitration panel may make recommendations for resolution of the dispute in
its reports. The findings and determinations and, if applicable, any
recommendations of the arbitration panel cannot add to or diminish the rights
and obligations of the Parties provided for in this Agreement.

12. The venue for the arbitration panel proceedings shall be decided by
mutual agreement between the Parties. If there is no agreement, the venue
shall alternate between the capitals of the Parties with the first meeting of the
arbitration panel proceedings to be held in the capital of the Party complained
against.

Article 10.11: Suspension or Termination of Proceedings
I. Where the Parties agree, the arbitration panel may suspend its work at
any time for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date of such
agreement. Upon request of a Party, the arbitration panel proceedings shall

be resumed after such suspension. In the event of such suspension, the

10-6

timeframes regarding the work of the arbitration panel shall be extended by
the amount of time that the work was suspended. If, in any case, each period
of the suspension of the work of the arbitration panel exceeds 12 months, the
authority of the arbitration panel shall lapse unless the Parties otherwise agree.
This lapse shall not prejudice the rights of the complaining Party to request, at
a later stage, the establishment of an arbitration panel on the same subject
matter.

2. The Parties may agree to terminate the proceedings of an arbitration
panel by jointly so notifying the chair of the arbitration panel at any time
before the issuance of the final report to the Parties.

3. Before the arbitration panel makes its decision, it may, at any stage of
the proceedings, propose to the Parties that the dispute be settled amicably.

Article 10.12: Interim Report

1. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the arbitration panel shall, within
90 days of the date of the establishment of the arbitration panel, issue to the
Parties an interim report containing the descriptive parts, the findings and
determinations, and, if applicable, any recommendations as to:

(a) | whether the measure at issue is inconsistent with the obligations
of this Agreement; or

(b) whether a Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations
under this Agreement,

as well as the applicability of the relevant provisions and the basic rationale
behind any findings.

2. Where the arbitration panel considers that the deadline for interim
report cannot be met, it may extend the period with the consent of the Parties
with the written notification stating the reasons for the delay and the date on
which the panel plans to issue its interim report. Under no circumstances
should the inter1m report be issued later than 120 days after the date of the
establishment of the arbitration panel.

3. Either Party may submit written comments to the arbitration panel on
its interim report within 15 days of the issuance of the report. After
considering any written comments by the Parties on the interim report, the
arbitration panel may modify its report and make any further examination it
considers appropriate.

Article 10.13: Final Report

1. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the arbitration panel shall issue a
final report to the Parties within 30 days of the date of issuance of the interim
report.

2. Where the arbitration panel considers that the deadline for its final
report cannot be met, it may extend the period with the consent of the Parties
with the written notification stating the reasons for the delay and the date on
which the panel plans to issue its final report. Under no circumstances
should the final report be issued later than 150 days after the date of the
establishment of the arbitration panel.

3. In cases of urgency, including those concerning perishable goods, the
arbitration panel shall make every effort to issue its interim and final reports
within half of the respective time periods under paragraph 1 of Article 10.12
and paragraph 1 of Article 10.13.

Article 10.14: Implementation of the Final Report

1. The determinations of the arbitration panel in the final report shall be
final and binding on the Parties and shall not be subject to appeal.

2. If, in its final report, the arbitration panel determines that the Party
complained against has not conformed to its obligations under the relevant
provisions of this Agreement, unless the Parties otherwise agree, the Party
complained against shall eliminate the non-conformity immediately, or if this
is not practicable, within a reasonable period of time.

3. The reasonable period of time referred to in paragraph 2 shall be
mutually agreed by the Parties. Where the Parties fail to agree on the
reasonable period of time within 45 days of the date of issuance of the final
report of the arbitration panel, either Party may refer the matter to the original
arbitration panel, which shall determine the reasonable period of time.

4. The Party complained against shall notify to the complaining Party
the implementing measures that it has taken to comply with the determinations
of the arbitration panel, before the expiry of the reasonable period of time
agreed by the Parties or determined by the original arbitration panel in
accordance with paragraph 3. Where there is disagreement between the
Parties as to whether the Party complained against has eliminated the non-
conformity as determined in the final report of the arbitration panel within the
reasonable period of time as determined pursuant to paragraph 3, either Party
may refer the matter to the original arbitration panel.

5. The arbitration panel that is established for purposes of this Article
shall, wherever possible, have, as its arbitrators, the arbitrators of the original
arbitration panel. If this is not possible, then the arbitrators of the arbitration
panel that is established for purposes of this Article shall be appointed
pursuant to Article 10.9. The arbitration panel shall issue its report to the
Parties within 20 days on the reasonable period of time and 45 days on the
other issues after the date when the matter is referred to it. When the
arbitration panel considers that it cannot issue its report within the
aforementioned periods, the relevant period may be extended by the arbitration
panel for a maximum of 30 days with the consent of the Parties. The report
shall be binding on the Parties.

Article 10.15: Non—Implementation, Compensation and Suspension of
Concessions or Other Obligations

1. If the Party complained against fails to notify the implementing
measures before the expiry of the reasonable period of time, or notifies to the
complaining Party that implementation is impracticable, or the arbitration
panel to which the matter is referred pursuant to paragraph 4 of Article 10.14
determines that the Party complained against has failed to eliminate the non-
conformity within the reasonable period of time, the Party complained against
shall, if so requested, enter into negotiations with the complaining Party with a
view to reaching a mutually satisfactory compensation.

2. If there is no agreement on satisfactory compensation within 20 days
of the date of receipt of the request mentioned in paragraph 1, the complaining
Party may, at any time, provide written notice to the Party complained against
that it intends to suspend the application to the Party complained against of
concessions or other obligations under this Agreement. The complaining
Party may begin suspending concessions or other obligations 30 days after the
notification of such suspension.

3. The compensation referred to in paragraph 1 and the suspension
referred to in paragraph 2 shall be temporary measures. Neither
compensation nor suspension is preferred to full elimination of the non-
conformity as determined in the report of the arbitration panel. The
suspension shall only be applied until such time as the non-conformity is fully
eliminated or a mutually satisfactory solution is reached.

4. In considering what concessions or other obligations to suspend
pursuant to paragraph 2:

(a) the complaining Party should first seek to suspend
concessions or other obligations with respect to the same

sector or sectors as that in which the report of the

10-9

arbitration panel referred to in Article 10.13 has found a
failure to comply with the obligations under this
Agreement;

(b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not practicable
or effective to suspend concessions or other obligations
with respect to the same sector or sectors, it may suspend
concessions or other obligations with respect to other
sectors. The notification of such suspension pursuant to
paragraph 2 shall indicate the reasons on which it is based;
and

(c) the level of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall be
equivalent to the level of the nullification or impairment.

5. If the Party complained against considers that the requirements for the
suspension of concessions or other obligations by the complaining Party set
out in paragraph 2, 3, or 4 have not been met, it may refer the matter to an
arbitration panel.

6. The arbitration panel that is established for purposes of this Article
shall, wherever possible, have, as its arbitrators, the arbitrators of the original
arbitration panel. If this is not possible, then the arbitrators of the arbitration
panel that is established for purposes of this Article shall be appointed
pursuant to Article 10.9. The arbitration panel established under this Article
shall issue its report to the Parties within 45 days after the date when the
matter is referred to it. When the arbitration panel considers that it cannot
issue its report within the aforementioned periods, the relevant period may be
extended by the arbitration panel for a maximum of 30 days with the consent
of the Parties. The report shall be binding on the Parties.

Article 10.16: Rules of Procedure

1. Dispute settlement proceedings under this Chapter shall be governed
by the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration set out in Annex 10-A. The Parties
in consultation with the arbitration panel may agree to adopt additional rules
of procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of the Annex.

2. Any period of time or other rule of procedure for arbitration panel
provided for in this Chapter and Annex 10-A may be modified by mutual
consent of the Parties. The Parties may also agree at any time not to apply
any provision of this Chapter.

Article 10.17: Expenses

10-10

1. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, each Party shall bear the costs of
its appointed arbitrator and its own expenses and legal costs.

2. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the costs of the chair of the arbitral
panel and other expenses associated with the conduct of its proceedings shall

be borne in equal shares by the Parties.

Article 10.18: Annexes

Annexes 10-A and 10-B shall form an integral part of this Chapter.

10-11

CHAPTER 11
EXCEPTIONS

Article 11.1: General Exceptions

1. For purposes of Chapter Two (National Treatment and Market
Access for Goods), Chapter Three (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures),
Chapter Four (Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation), and Chapter Five
(Trade Remedies), Article XX of GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. For purposes of Chapters Six (Trade in Services) and Seven
(Investment), Article XIV of GATS (including its footnotes) is incorporated
into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 11.2: Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:

(a)

(b)

require a Party to furnish any information, the disclosure
of which it considers contrary to its essential security
interests;

prevent a Party from taking any action which it considers
necessary for the protection of its essential security
interests:

(i)

(il)

(iii)

(iv)

relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and
implements of war and to such traffic in other
goods and materials or relating to the supply of
services as carried on, directly or indirectly, for
the purposes of supplying or provisioning a
military establishment;

relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or
the materials from which they are derived;

taken so as to protect critical public infrastructure,
including communications, power and water
infrastructures, from deliberate attempts intended
to disable or degrade such infrastructure; or

taken in time of domestic emergency, or war or
other emergency in international relations; or

l.

2.

3.

4.

(c)

prevent a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its
obligations under the United Nations Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Article 11.3: Taxation Measures

Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall
apply to taxation measures.

This Agreement shall only grant rights or impose obligations with
respect to taxation measures where:

(a)

(b)

(c)

corresponding rights and obligations are also granted or
imposed under Article III of GATT 1994;

they are granted or imposed under Article 7.11 (Transfers);
or

they are granted or imposed under Article 7.12
(Expropriation and Compensation).

Where paragraph 2(b) or (c) apply, Article 7.19 (Investor-State
Dispute Settlement) shall also apply in respect of taxation measures.

(a)

(b)

Where an investor claims that the disputing Party has
breached Article 7.11 (Transfers) or Article 7.12
(Expropriation and Compensation) by the adoption or
enforcement of a taxation measure, the competent
authorities of the disputing Party shall request
consultations with the competent authorities of | the non-
disputing Party at the time that the disputing Party receives
the investor’s notice of intent under Article 7.19 (Investor-
State Dispute Settlement). The competent authorities of
the Parties shall hold consultations with a view to
determining whether Article 7.11 (Transfers) has been
breached or whether the taxation measure in question has
an effect equivalent to expropriation. Any tribunal
that may be established in accordance with Article 7.19
(Investor-State Dispute Settlement) shall accept as binding
the decision of the competent authorities under _ this
paragraph.

If the competent authorities of the Parties fail to determine
whether Article 7.11 (Transfers) has been breached or

whether the taxation measure has an effect equivalent to
expropriation within 180 days of the date of receipt of the
request for consultations by the non-disputing Party, the
investor may submit its claim to arbitration under Article
7.19 (Investor-State Dispute Settlement).

(c) For purposes of this paragraph, competent authorities
means:
(1) with respect to Korea, the Deputy Minister for

Tax and Customs, Ministry of Economy and
Finance; and

(11) with respect to Indonesia, the Minister of
Finance or his or her authorised representative;

or their respective successors.

5. In assessing whether a measure related to taxation constitutes
expropriation, the following considerations shall be taken into account:

(a) the imposition of taxes does not generally constitute an
expropriation. The mere introduction of a new taxation
measure or the imposition of taxes in more than one
jurisdiction in respect of an investment generally does not
in and of itself constitute an expropriation;

(b) enforcement activities of the tax laws including seizure of
property for the purpose of tax collection generally do not
constitute expropriation;

(c) a taxation measure that is consistent with internationally
recognised tax policies, principles, and practices does not
constitute an expropriation. In particular, a taxation
measure aimed at preventing the avoidance or evasion of
taxes generally does not constitute an expropriation;

(d) a taxation measure that is applied on a non-discriminatory
basis, as opposed to being targeted at investors of a
particular nationality or specific individual taxpayers, is
not likely to constitute an expropriation; and

' For greater certainty, the term “individual taxpayers” includes natural person, juridical
person, and enterprise.

(e) a taxation measure generally does not constitute an
expropriation if it was already in force when the
investment was made and information about the measure
was made public or otherwise made publicly available.

6. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of
either Party under any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency
relating to a taxation measure between this Agreement and any such tax
convention, that convention shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
The competent authorities under that convention shall have sole responsibility
for jointly determining whether any inconsistency exists between this
Agreement and that convention.

7. Nothing in this Agreement shall oblige a Party to extend to the other
Party the benefit of any treatment, preference or privilege arising from any tax
convention by which the Party is bound.

8. For purposes of this Article:

(a) tax convention means a convention for the avoidance of
double taxation or other international taxation agreement
or arrangement; and

(b) taxes and taxation measures do not include customs duty
as defined in Article 1.1 (General Definitions) and
measures listed as exceptions in subparagraphs (b), (c),
(d), and (e) of that definition.

Article 11.4: Confidentiality of Information

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall require a Party to furnish or allow
access to information that would be contrary to its law or impede law
enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or that would be
prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of any particular enterprises,
public or private.

2. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, where a Party
provides information to the other Party in accordance with this Agreement and
designates the information as confidential, the Party receiving the information
shall maintain the confidentiality of the information. The information shall
be used only for the purposes specified by the Party providing the information.
It shall not be disclosed without the specific written permission of the Party
providing the information, except where the disclosure of information is
necessary to comply with the legal requirements of a Party.

CHAPTER 12
INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 12.1: Establishment of Joint Committee

1. The Parties hereby establish the Joint Committee.

2. The Joint Committee shall be composed of relevant government
officials of each Party and co-chaired by ministerial level officials of the
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy of Korea and the Ministry of Trade of
Indonesia, or their respective designees. The Joint Committee shall agree on
its meeting schedule and set its agenda.

Article 12.2: Functions of Joint Committee

1. The Joint Committee shall:

(a)

consider any matter related to the implementation and
operation of this Agreement;

(b) review the implementation and operation of this Agreement;

(c) supervise and coordinate the work of all committees and
subsidiary bodies established under this Agreement;

(d) consider ways to further enhance trade and investment
relations between the Parties;

(e) seek to resolve disagreements regarding any matter arising
under this Agreement; and

(f) carry out any other function relating to the areas covered by
this Agreement as the Parties may agree.

2. The Joint Committee may:

(a) establish and delegate responsibilities to committees, or
subsidiary bodies;

(b) adopt its own rules of procedure at its first meeting;

(c) seek to resolve differences that may arise regarding the

interpretation or application of this Agreement; and

12-1

(d) make recommendations.

Article 12.3: Procedures of the Joint Committee

1. The Joint Committee shall meet within one year from the entry into
force of this Agreement. Its meetings shall be chaired jointly by the Parties.

2. Thereafter, unless the Parties otherwise agree, the Joint Committee
shall convene:

(a) in regular session every year, with such sessions to be held
alternately in the territory of each Party; and

(b) in special session upon the request of either Party, with such
sessions to be held in the territory of the other Party or at such

locations as the Parties may agree.

3. The meetings of the Joint Committee may be held in person or, if
agreed by the Parties, by any technological means available to them.

4. All decisions of the Joint Committee shall be taken by mutual
agreement.

Article 12.4: Committees and Subsidiary Bodies
1. The following committees are established under this Agreement:

(a) Committee on Trade in Goods, in accordance with Article
2.15 (Committee on Trade in Goods);

(b) Committee on Trade in Services and Investment;

(c) Committee on Economic Cooperation, in accordance with
Article 8.4 (Implementation);

(d) Committee on Customs and Trade Facilitation, in accordance
with Article 4.12 (Committee on Customs and Trade
Facilitation).
2. The Joint Committee may establish additional subsidiary bodies,

including ad hoc bodies, as it determines necessary to address issues arising
under, and assist with the implementation of, this Agreement.

3. Unless otherwise provided, any subsidiary bodies shall:

12-2

(a) be composed of representatives of the Parties;

(b) be chaired jointly by the Parties;

(c) by agreement, take decisions on any matter within its
functions.
4. The committees or subsidiary bodies shall inform the Joint Committee

of their schedule and agenda sufficiently in advance of their meetings. They
shall report to the Joint Committee on their activities at each regular meeting
of the Joint Committee. The creation or existence of a committee or
subsidiary bodies shall not prevent either Party from bringing any matter
directly to the Joint Committee.

5. The Joint Committee may decide to change or undertake the task
assigned to a committee or subsidiary bodies or may dissolve a committee or
subsidiary body.
Article 12.5: Contact Points

1. In order to facilitate communications between the Parties on any trade
matter covered by this Agreement, the Parties hereby establish the following
contact points:

(a) for Korea, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy; and

(b) for Indonesia, the Ministry of Trade;

or their respective successors.
2. Upon request of either Party, the contact point of the other Party shall
indicate the office or official responsible for any matter relating to the
implementation of this Agreement, and provide the required support to

facilitate communications with the requesting Party. Each Party shall notify
the other Party of any change in its contact point in due time.

12-3

CHAPTER 13
FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 13.1: Annexes, Appendices, and Footnotes

The Annexes, Appendices, and footnotes to this Agreement shall form an
integral part of this Agreement.

Article 13.2: Amendments

The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. Any
amendment shall enter into force after the Parties exchange written
notifications through diplomatic channels certifying that they have completed
all necessary domestic legal procedures, on such date as the Parties may agree.
The amendments shall form an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 13.3: Amendments to the WTO Agreement

If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated into
this Agreement is amended, the Parties shall, upon request, consult to consider
amending the relevant provisions of this Agreement.

Article 13.4: Entry into Force

1. The entry into force of this Agreement is subject to the completion
of necessary domestic legal procedures by each Party.

2. This Agreement shall enter into force 60 days after the date on
which the Parties exchange written notifications through diplomatic channels
that they have completed their respective necessary domestic legal
procedures, or on such other date as the Parties may agree.

Article 13.5: Review of the Agreement

l. In accordance with Article 12.2 (Functions of Joint Committee), this
Agreement is subject to review at any time following one year after the entry
into force of the Agreement upon the request of a Party, with a view to
updating and enhancing this Agreement to further its objectives, through
negotiations, as appropriate. The review shall include, but is not limited to,
consideration of deepening liberalisation, reducing or eliminating remaining
discrimination and further expanding market access.

13-1

2. In conducting a review under this Article, the Joint Committee shall
take into account:

(a) the work of all committees and subsidiary bodies
established under this Agreement;

(b) relevant developments in international fora; and

(c) as appropriate, inputs from experts.

Article 13.6: Duration and Termination

1. This Agreement shall remain in force unless terminated pursuant to
paragraph 2.
2. Either Party may notify the other Party of its intention to terminate

this Agreement in writing through diplomatic channels.

3. Such termination shall take effect six months after the receipt of the
notice referred to in paragraph 2, unless the Parties agree otherwise.