RECOGNISING the long-standing friendship and strong economic and
political ties between the UAE and Indonesia, and wishing to strengthen
these links through the creation of a free trade area, thus establishing close
and lasting relations;

DETERMINED to build on their respective rights and obligations under the
Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organisation;

CONSCIOUS of the dynamic and rapidly changing global environment
brought about by globalisation and technological progress that presents
various economic and strategic challenges and opportunities to the Parties;

DETERMINED to develop and strengthen their economic and trade
relations by expanding trade in goods and services in their common interest
and for their mutual benefit;

AIMING to promote transfer of technology and expand trade;

CONVINCED that the establishment of a free trade area will provide a more
favourable climate for the promotion and development of economic and trade
relations between the Parties;

AIMING to facilitate trade by promoting efficient and transparent customs
procedures that ensure predictability for their importers and exporters;

DETERMINED to support the growth and development of micro, small and
medium-sized enterprises by enhancing their ability to participate in and
benefit from the opportunities created by this Agreement;

AIMING to establishing a clear, transparent, and predictable legal and
commercial framework for business planning, that supports the growth of
trade and investment;

RECOGNISING their inherent right to regulate and resolve to preserve the
flexibility of the Parties to set legislative and regulatory priorities, and protect
legitimate public welfare objectives, such as health, safety, environmental
protection, conservation of living or non-living exhaustible natural resources,
integrity and stability of the financial system, and public morals, in
accordance with the rights and obligations provided in this Agreement;

HAVE AGREED, in pursuit of the above, to conclude the following
Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “this Agreement’):

CHAPTER 1

INITIAL PROVISIONS AND GENERAL DEFINITION

Article 1.1: Establishment of the Indonesia- United Arab Emirates
Comprehensive Economic Partnership as a Free Trade Area

The Parties, consistent with Article XXIV of GATT 1994 and Article V of
GATS, hereby establish the Indonesia-United Arab Emirate Comprehensive
Economic Partnership as a free trade area in accordance with the provisions
of this Agreement.

Article 1.2: General Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement:

(a)

(c)

(d)

administrative ruling of general application means an
administrative ruling or interpretation that applies to all
persons and fact situations that fall generally within the ambit
of that administrative ruling or interpretation and_ that
establishes a norm of conduct, but does not include:

(i) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or
quasi-judicial proceeding that applies to a particular
person, good, or service of the other Party in a specific
case; or

(ii) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act
or practice;

Agreement on Agriculture means the Agreement on
Agriculture in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

Anti-Dumping Agreement means the Agreement on
Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

customs authority means any authority that is responsible
under the law of each Party for the administration and
enforcement of its customs laws and regulations;

(f)

(9)

(k)
(I)

customs duty means any customs or import duty and a
charge of any kind imposed in connection with the importation
of a good, but does not include any:

(i) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed
consistently with Article Ill of the GATT 1994;

(ii) anti-dumping or countervailing duty that is applied
consistently with Article VI of the GATT 1994, the Anti-
Dumping Agreement on the Implementation of Article
VI of the GATT 1994, and the SCM Agreement on
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures in Annex 1A to
the WTO Agreement; or

(iii) | fee or other charge commensurate with the cost of
services rendered in conformity with Article VIII of the
GATT 1994;

customs procedures means the measures applied by the
customs authority of a Party to goods and to the means of
transport that are subject to its customs laws;

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on
Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

days means calendar days, including weekends and holidays;

GATS means the General Agreement on Trade in Services in
Annex 1B to the WTO Agreement;

GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

good means any merchandise, product, article, or material;

Harmonised System or HS means the Harmonised
Commodity Description and Coding System, including its
General Rules for the Interpretation, Section Notes, Chapter
Notes and Subheading Notes;

Import Licensing Agreement means the Agreement on
Import Licensing Procedures in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement;

Joint Committee means the Joint Committee established
pursuant to Article 18.1 (Joint Committee);

Safeguards Agreement means the Agreement = on
Safeguards in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

SCM Agreement means the Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement;

TBT Agreement means the Agreement on Technical Barriers
to Trade in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

territory means:

(i) for the UAE, the land territories, internal waters,
territorial sea, including the seabed and subsoil thereof,
and airspace over such territories and waters, as well
as the contiguous zone, the continental shelf and
exclusive economic zone, over which the UAE has
sovereignty, sovereign rights or jurisdiction as defined
in its laws, and in accordance with international law;

(ii) | for Indonesia, the land territories, internal waters,
archipelagic waters, territorial sea, including the
seabed and subsoil thereof, and airspace over such
territories and waters, as well as the contiguous zone,
the continental shelf and exclusive economic zone,
over which Indonesia has sovereignty, sovereign rights
or jurisdiction as defined in its laws, and in accordance
with international law, including the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, done at Montego
Bay on 10 December 1982;

(t)

trade administration documents means forms issued or
controlled by a Party that must be completed by or for an
importer or exporter in relation to the import or export of goods;

Trade Facilitation Agreement means the Agreement on
Trade Facilitation in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement

TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights in Annex 1C to the
WTO Agreement;

WTO means the World Trade Organisation; and
WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement

Establishing the World Trade Organisation, done at
Marrakesh on 15 April 1994.

Article 1.3: Objectives

The objectives of this Agreement are to enhance and facilitate trade and
investment between the Parties in accordance with the provisions of this

Agreement.

Article 1.4: Relation to Other Agreements

1.

The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under existing
agreements to which both Parties are party, including the WTO
Agreement.

For greater certainty, this Agreement shall not be construed to
derogate from any international legal obligation between the Parties
that provides for more favourable treatment of goods, services,
investments, or persons than that provided for under this Agreement.

Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, in the event of any
inconsistency between this Agreement and any other agreement to
which both Parties are party, the Parties shall, upon request, consult
with each other with a view to finding a mutually satisfactory solution.

Article 1.5: Regional and Local Government

1.

Each Party shall take such reasonable measures as may be available
to it to ensure observance of the provisions of this Agreement by the
regional and local governments and authorities and by non-
governmental bodies in the exercise of governmental powers
delegated by central, regional, and local governments and authorities
within its territory.

This provision is to be interpreted and applied in accordance with the
principles set out in paragraph 12 of Article XXIV of the GATT 1994
and paragraph 3 of Article | of the GATS.

Article 1.6: Transparency

1.

Each Party shall publish or otherwise make publicly available, on the
internet where feasible, its laws, regulations, and administrative
rulings of general application as well as its respective international
agreements, which may affect the operation of this Agreement.

Each Party shall, within a reasonable period of time, respond to
specific questions and, upon request, provide information to the other
Party on matters referred to in paragraph 1.

The Parties agree to cooperate in promoting transparency, including
through exchange of information and best practices on_ their
respective regulatory processes.

Article 1.7: Confidential Information

1.

Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations,
maintain the confidentiality of information designated as confidential
by the other Party.

Nothing in this Agreement shall require a Party to disclose
confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law
enforcement of the Party, or otherwise be contrary to the public
interest, or which would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests
of any economic operator.

Where a Party provides information to the other Party in accordance
with this Agreement and designates the information as confidential,
the Party receiving the information shall maintain the confidentiality
of the information. Such information shall be used only for the
purposes specified and shall not be otherwise disclosed without the
specific permission of the Party providing the information.

Article 1.8: Promotion of Competition

1.

The Parties shall promote competition in their trade and investment
by preventing unfair competition policies in their economic relations.

No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 16
(Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this Article.

CHAPTER 2

TRADE IN GOODS

Article 2.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) export subsidy means a subsidy as defined by Article 3 of
the SCM Agreement and includes export subsidies listed in
Article 9 of the Agreement on Agriculture.

(b) import licensing means an administrative procedure used for
the operation of import licensing regimes requiring the
submission of an application or other documentation (other
than that required for customs purposes) to the relevant
administrative body as a prior condition for importation into the
customs territory of the importing Party; and

Article 2.2: Scope

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter applies to
trade in goods between the Parties.

Article 2.3: National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation

Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party
in accordance with Article Ill of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative
notes. To this end, Article Ill of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes
are incorporated into and form part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 2.4: Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall
reduce or eliminate customs duties on originating goods of the other
Party in accordance with its Schedule in Annex 2A (Schedules of
Tariff Commitments).

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, a Party shall not
increase any existing customs duty or introduce a new customs duty
on an originating good as set out in its Schedule in Annex 2A
(Schedules of Tariff Commitments).

If the most-favoured-nation (hereinafter referred to as “MFN” in this
Chapter) rate of customs duty applied by a Party on a particular good
is lower than the rate of customs duty provided for in its Schedule in
Annex 2A (Schedules of Tariff Commitments), that Party shall:

(a) apply the lower rate to the originating good of the other Party;
and

(b) — publish changes to the MFN rate on the internet.

Article 2.5: Acceleration or Improvement of Tariff Commitments

1.

Upon request by either Party, the Parties shall consult to consider
accelerating, improving, or broadening the scope of the elimination
of customs duties as set out in their Schedule in Annex 2A
(Schedules of Tariff Commitments).

Further commitments between the Parties to accelerate or broaden
the scope of the elimination of a customs duty on a good (or to
include a good in Annex 2A (Schedule of Tariff Commitments) shall
supersede any duty rate or staging category determined pursuant to
their respective Schedules upon the incorporation of the modification
into this Agreement in accordance with Article 19.2 (Amendments).

Nothing in this Agreement shall prohibit a Party from unilaterally
accelerating, or broadening the scope of, the elimination of customs
duties set out in its Schedule to Annex 2A (Schedules of Tariff
Commitments) to an originating good from the other Party. Any such
unilateral acceleration, or broadening of the scope of, the elimination
of customs duties will not permanently supersede any duty rate or
staging category determined pursuant to their respective Schedule
nor serve to waive that Party’s right to impose at a later time the duty
rate or staging category that is determined for that later time by their
respective Schedule.

For greater certainty with respect to paragraph 3, a Party may:

10

(a) raise a customs duty back to the level established in its
Schedule to Annex 2A (Schedule of Tariff Commitments)
following a unilateral reduction; or

(b) maintain or increase a customs duty as authorised by the
Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO.

Article 2.6: Classification of Goods and Transposition of Schedules of
Tariff Commitments

1.

The classification of goods in trade between the Parties shall be in
conformity with the Harmonised Systems (HS) and its amendments.

The Parties shall mutually decide whether any revisions are
necessary to implement Annex 2A (Schedule of Tariff Commitments)
due to periodic amendments and transposition of the HS Code.

If the Parties decide that revisions are necessary in accordance with
paragraph 2, the transposition of the Schedules shall be carried out
in accordance with the methodologies and procedures adopted by
the Committee on Trade in Goods. The said methodologies and
procedures should be based on the methodology recommended by
the WTO, at a minimum, provide for:

(a) — the timely circulation by each Party of a draft schedule of tariff
commitments in the nomenclature of the revised HS Code
accompanied by a two-way transposition setting out at
national tariff line level:

(i) a concordance between the draft schedule of tariff
commitments in the nomenclature of the revised HS
Code and the schedule of tariff commitments in the
nomenclature of the then current HS Code; and

(ii) a concordance between the schedule of tariff
commitments in the nomenclature of the then current
HS Code and the draft schedule of tariff commitments
in the nomenclature of the revised HS Code;

(b) the provision of comments by the other Party on the draft
schedules circulated in accordance with subparagraph (a),

11

and consultations between the Parties, as necessary, with a
view to resolving any concerns raised. Consultations shall
take place within 60 days of a Party requesting such
consultations.

Following completion of the transposition process in paragraph 3, the
Parties through the Committee on Trade in Goods shall endorse and
publish such revisions in a timely manner.

Each Party shall ensure that the transposition of its schedule of tariff
commitments under paragraph 3 does not afford treatment to an
originating good of the other Party that is less favourable than that
set out in its Schedule in Annex 2A (Schedules of Tariff
Commitments).

Article 2.7: Temporary Admission of Goods

1.

Each Party shall allow, as provided for in its laws and regulations,
goods to be brought into its customs territory conditionally relieved,
totally or partially, from payment of import duties and taxes, if such
goods:

(a) are brought into its customs territory for a specific purpose;
(b) are intended for re-exportation within a specific period; and

(c) have not undergone any change, except normal depreciation
and wastage due to the use made of them.

Each Party shall, at the request of the importer and for reasons
deemed valid by its customs authority, extend the time limit for
temporary admission beyond the period initially fixed in accordance
with its laws and regulations.

Each Party shall not impose any condition on the temporary
admission of a good referred to in paragraph 1, other than to require
that such good:

(a) | be accompanied by a security deposit in an amount no greater

than the customs duty and charges according to the
respective laws and regulations that would otherwise be owed

12

on importation, which shall be releasable on exportation of the
good;

(b) be exported within such period of time as is reasonably related
to the purpose of temporary admission;

(c) be capable of identification when imported and exported;
(d) not be sold or leased while in its territory;

(e) not be imported in a quantity greater than is reasonable for its
intended use; and

(f) be otherwise admissible into the importing Party’s territory
under its laws and regulations.

If any condition that a Party imposes under paragraph 3 has not been
fulfilled, that Party may apply the customs duty and any other charge’
that would normally be owed on the good, as per its laws and
regulations.

Each Party shall permit a good temporarily admitted pursuant to this
Article to be re-exported through a customs port other than that
through which it was admitted in accordance with its laws and
regulations.

Each Party shall relieve the importer of liability for failure to export a
temporarily admitted good upon presentation of satisfactory proof to
its customs authority that the good has been destroyed within the
original time limit for temporary admission or any lawful extension. A
Party may condition relief of liability under this paragraph by requiring
the importer to receive prior approval from its customs authority
before the good can be so destroyed.

Each Party, through its customs authority, shall adopt and maintain
procedures providing for the expeditious release of goods admitted
under this Article. To the extent possible, these procedures shall
provide that when such goods accompany a national or resident of

' For the purposes of this paragraph, any other charge includes penalties whenever
applicable under a Party’s laws and regulations.

13

the other Party who is seeking temporary entry, the good shall be
released simultaneously with the entry of that national or resident.

Article 2.8: Duty-Free Entry of Commercial Samples of Negligible
Value

Each Party shall, in accordance with its respective laws and regulations,
grant duty-free entry to commercial samples of negligible value imported
from the territory of the other Party, regardless of their origin, but may
require that commercial samples of negligible value be imported solely for
this solicitation for goods of orders or services provided from the territory of
the other Party or a non-Party and not be imported for commercial sale.

Article 2.9: General Elimination of Quantitative Restrictions

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no Party shall adopt or
maintain any prohibition or restriction other than duties, taxes, or other
charges, whether made effective through quotas, import or export licenses
or other measures, on the importation of any good of the other Party or on
the exportation of any good destined for the territory of the other Party,
except in accordance with its rights and obligations under the relevant
provisions of the WTO Agreement. To this end, Article XI of the GATT 1994
and its interpretive notes are incorporated into and made a part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 2.10: Import Licensing

1. Neither Party shall adopt or maintain a measure that is inconsistent
with the Import Licensing Agreement.

2. Each Party shall ensure that all automatic and non-automatic import
licensing measures are implemented in a transparent and predictable
manner, and applied in accordance with the Import Licensing
Agreement.

3. Promptly after this Agreement enters into force, each Party shall
notify the other Party of its existing import licensing procedures, if
any. The notification shall contain the information as referred to in
paragraph 2 of Article 5 of the Import Licensing Agreement.

14

On request of the other Party, a Party shall, promptly and to the
extent possible, respond to the request of that other Party for
information on import licensing requirements of general application.

A Party shall be deemed to be in compliance with the obligations in
paragraph 3 with respect to an existing import licensing procedure if:

(a)  it has notified that procedure to the WTO Committee on Import
Licensing provided for in Article 4 of the Import Licensing
Agreement together with the information specified in
paragraph 2 of Article 5 of that Agreement;

(b) in the most recent annual submission due before the date of
entry into force of this Agreement for that Party to the WTO
Committee on Import Licensing in response to the annual
questionnaire on import licensing procedures described in
paragraph 3 of Article 7 of the Import Licensing Agreement, it
has provided, with respect to that procedure, the information
requested in that questionnaire; and

(c) it has included in either the notice described in subparagraph
(a) or the annual submission described in subparagraph (b)
any information required to be notified to the other Parties
under paragraph 8.

Each Party shall comply with paragraph 4(a) of Article 1 of the Import
Licensing Agreement with respect to any new or modified import
licensing procedure. Each Party shall also publish on an official
government website any information that it is required to publish
under paragraph 4(a) of Article 1 of the Import Licensing Agreement.

Each Party shall notify the other Party of any new import licensing
procedures it adopts and any modifications it makes to its existing
import licensing procedures, if possible, no later than 60 days before
the new procedure or modification takes effect. In no case shall a
Party provide the notification later than 60 days after the date of its
publication. The notification shall include any information required
under paragraph 8. A Party shall be deemed to be in compliance
with this obligation if it notifies a new import licensing procedure or a
modification to an existing import licensing procedure to the WTO
Committee on Import Licensing in accordance with paragraph 1

15

through 3 of Article 5 of the Import Licensing Agreement and includes
in its notification any information required to be notified to the other
Parties under paragraph 8.

(a)

A notice under paragraph 3, 5, or 7 shall state if, under any
import licensing procedure that is a subject of the notice:

(i)

(ii)

the terms of an import licence for any product limit the
permissible end users of the product; or

the Party imposes any of the following conditions on
eligibility for obtaining a licence to import any product:

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

(F)

membership in an industry association;

approval by an industry association of the
request for an import licence;

a history of importing the product or similar
products;

minimum importer or end user production
capacity;

minimum importer or end user registered capital;
or

a contractual or other relationship between the
importer and a distributor in the Party’s territory.

A notice that states, under subparagraph (a), that there is a
limitation on permissible end users or a licence-eligibility
condition shall:

(i)

(ii)

list all products for which the end-user limitation or
licence-eligibility condition applies; and

describe the end-user limitation or licence-eligibility
condition.

16

9. Each Party shall respond within 60 days to a reasonable enquiry from
the other Party concerning its licensing rules and its procedures for
the submission of an application for an import licence, including the
eligibility of persons, firms and institutions to make an application, the
administrative body or bodies to be approached and the list of
products subject to the licensing requirement.

10. If a Party denies an import licence application with respect to a good
of the other Party, it shall, on request of the applicant and within a
reasonable period after receiving the request, provide the applicant
with a written explanation of the reason for the denial.

11. Neither Party shall apply an import licensing procedure to a good of
the other Party unless it has, with respect to that procedure, met the
requirements of paragraph 3 or 6, as applicable.

Article 2.11: Customs Valuation

The Parties shall determine the customs value of goods traded between

them in accordance with the provisions of Article VII of the GATT 1994 and

the Customs Valuation Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 2.12: Elimination of Export Subsidies

Neither Party shall adopt or maintain any export subsidy on any good

destined for the territory of the other Party.

Article 2.13: Goods in Transit

Each Party shall continue to facilitate customs clearance of goods in transit

from or to other Party in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article V of GATT

1994 and the relevant provisions of the Trade Facilitation Agreement.

Article 2.14: Transparency

Article X of the GATT 1994 is incorporated into and made a part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

17

Article 2.15: Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments

1. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the imposition of restrictive
measures for balance-of-payments purposes.

2. Any such measures taken for trade in goods shall be in accordance
with Article XII of the GATT 1994 and the Understanding on the
Balance-of-Payments Provisions of the GATT 1994, the provisions
of which are incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement,
mutatis mutandis.

Article 2.16: Administrative Fees and Formalities

1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article
Vill of GATT 1994 and its interpretive notes and Article 6 of the Trade
Facilitation Agreement, that all fees and charges of whatever
character (other than import or export duties, charges equivalent to
an internal tax or other internal charge applied consistently with
paragraph 2 of Article Ill of GATT 1994, and anti-dumping and
countervailing duties applied pursuant to a Party’s law) imposed on,
or in connection with, importation or exportation are limited in amount
to the approximate cost of services rendered and do not represent
an indirect protection to domestic goods or a taxation of imports or
exports for fiscal purposes.

2. Each Party shall promptly make information available on the internet
regarding the fees and charges it imposes in connection with
importation or exportation.

Article 2.17: Non-Tariff Measures

1. A Party shall not adopt or maintain any non-tariff measure on the
importation of any good of the other Party or on the exportation of
any good destined for the territory of the other Party, except in
accordance with its WTO rights and obligations or this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall ensure the transparency of its non-tariff measures

permitted under paragraph 1 and shall ensure that any such
measures are not prepared, adopted, or applied with the view to, or

18

with the effect of, creating unnecessary obstacles to trade with the
other Party.

Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures, and
administrative rulings relating to non-tariff measures are promptly
published, including on the internet where feasible, or otherwise
made available in such a manner as to enable the other Party to
become acquainted with them.

A Party may request technical consultations in writing with the other
Party on a non-tariff measure that the requesting Party considers to
be adversely affecting its trade. The request shall clearly identify the
measure and the concerns as to how the measure adversely affects
trade between the Parties. Technical consultations may be
conducted via any means mutually agreed by the Parties.

If a Party considers that a non-tariff measure of the other Party is an
unnecessary obstacle to trade, that Party may nominate such a non-
tariff measure for review by the Committee on Trade in Goods by
notifying the other Party at least 30 days before the date of the next
scheduled meeting of the Committee. A nomination of a non-tariff
measure for review shall include reasons for its nomination and, if
possible, suggested solutions. The Committee on Trade in Goods
shall immediately review the measure with a view to securing a
mutually agreed solution to the matter. Review by the Committee on
Trade in Goods is without prejudice to the Parties rights under
Chapter 16 (Dispute Settlement).

Article 2.18: State Trading Enterprises

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from
maintaining or establishing a state trading enterprise in accordance with
Article XVII of the GATT 1994.

Article 2.19: Exchange of Data

1.

The Parties recognise the value of trade data to accurately analyse
the implementation of this Agreement. The Parties shall cooperate
with a view to conducting periodic exchanges of data relating to trade
in goods between the Parties.

19

The Parties may engage in such periodic exchanges within the
Committee on Trade in Goods pursuant to Article 2.20 (Committee
on Trade in Goods) for such purposes or any purposes as the Joint
Committee may determine.

A Party shall give positive consideration to a request from the other
Party for technical assistance for the purposes of the exchange of
data under paragraph 1.

Article 2.20: Committee on Trade in Goods

1.

The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade in Goods under
the Joint Committee, which shall comprise of representatives of each
Party.

The Committee shall meet once a year or as often as the Parties
consider necessary to consider any matters arising under this
Chapter.

The Committee shall establish a contact point for each Party at a
senior level to facilitate communication between the Parties,
including to encourage consultation, as early as practicable, on any
matter relating to this Chapter.

The Committee’s functions shall include, inter alia:
(a) reviewing and monitoring the implementation of this Chapter;

(b) promoting trade in goods between the Parties, including
consultations on accelerating or improving tariff commitments
under this Agreement and other issues as appropriate;

(c) addressing barriers to trade in goods between the Parties
especially those related to the application of non-tariff
measures, and, where appropriate, referring any matters to
the Joint Committee for consideration;

(d) endorsing the transposition of the schedules of tariff

commitments in Annex 2A (Schedules of Tariff Commitments)
in accordance with Article 2.6 (Classification of Goods and

20

(e)

Transposition of Schedules of Tariff Commitments), and
consulting to resolve any conflicts; and

discussing any other matter arising under this Chapter as
mutually agreed by the Parties.

21

CHAPTER 3

RULES OF ORIGIN

SECTION A
RULES OF ORIGIN

Article 3.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(c)

(d)

(e)

aquaculture means the farming of aquatic organisms
including fish, molluscs, crustaceans, other aquatic
invertebrates, and aquatic plants, from seedstock such as
eggs, fry, fingerlings, and larvae, by intervention in the rearing
or growth processes to enhance production, such as regular
stocking, feeding, or protection from predators;

CIF value means the value of the imported good, inclusive of
the cost of insurance and freight up to the port or place of entry
into the country of importation;

competent authority means the government authority that,
according to the laws and regulations of each Party, is
responsible for issuing a certificate of origin or for the
designation of certification entities or bodies:

(i) in the case of the UAE, the Ministry of Economy, or its
successor; and

(ii) in the case of Indonesia, the Ministry of Trade, or its
SUCCeSSOT;

exporter means a person located in the exporting Party who
exports a good from the exporting Party in accordance with
the applicable laws and regulations of the exporting Party;

FOB value means the value of the good free on board,

inclusive of the cost of transport (regardless of the mode of
transport) to the port or site of final shipment abroad;

29

(f)

(h)

generally accepted accounting principles means those
principles recognised by consensus or with substantial
authoritative support in the territory of a Party, with respect to
the recording of revenues, expenses, costs, assets, and
liabilities, the disclosure of information and the preparation of
financial statements. These principles may encompass broad
guidelines of general application as well as detailed
standards, practices, and procedures;

identical and interchangeable materials means materials
that are fungible as a result of being of the same kind and
commercial quality, possessing the same technical and
physical characteristics, and which once they are incorporated
into the finished product cannot be distinguished from one
another for origin purposes by virtue of any markings or mere
visual examination;

importer means a person who imports a good into the
importing Party in accordance with the applicable laws and
regulations of the importing Party;

indirect material means any material used in the production,
testing, or inspection of a good but not physically incorporated
into it or the operation of equipment associated with the
production of a good, including:

(i) fuel and energy;

(ii) tools, dies, and moulds;

(iii) | spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of
equipment;

(iv) lubricants, greases, compounding materials, and other
materials used in production or used to operate
equipment;

(v) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, and _ safety
equipment;

(vi) equipment, devices, and supplies used for testing or
inspecting the good;

30

(j)

(vii) catalysts and solvents; and

(vill) any other material that is not incorporated into the good
but the use of which in the production of the good can
reasonably be demonstrated to be a part of that
production;

material refers to any ingredient, raw material, component, or
part, used in the production of a good;

non-originating good or non-originating material means a
good or material, which does not qualify as originating in
accordance with this Chapter;

producer means a person who engages in the production of
goods; and

production means methods of obtaining goods, including
growing, mining, harvesting, farming, raising, breeding,
extracting, gathering, collecting, capturing, fishing,
aquaculture, trapping, hunting, manufacturing, processing, or
assembling a good.

Article 3.2: Originating Goods

Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, a good shall qualify as an
originating good of a Party if the good is:

(a)

(b)

(c)

wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of that
Party as defined in Article 3.3 (Wholly Obtained or Produced
Goods);

not wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of that
Party, provided that the good has satisfied the requirements
of Article 3.4 (Not Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods); or

produced entirely in the territory of that Party exclusively from
originating materials,

and meets all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

31

Article 3.3: Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

For the purposes of this Chapter, the following goods shall be considered
as wholly obtained or produced in the territory of a Party:

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)

(e)

(g)

(h)

plants and plant goods, including fruit, flowers, vegetables,
trees, seaweed, fungi, and live plants, grown and harvested,
picked, or gathered there;

live animals born and raised there;
goods obtained from live animals there;

goods obtained by hunting, trapping, fishing, farming,
aquaculture, gathering, or capturing conducted there;

minerals and other naturally occurring substances, not
included in subparagraphs (a) through (d), extracted or taken
from its soil, waters, seabed, or subsoil beneath the seabed;

goods of sea-fishing and other marine goods taken by vessels
registered with the Party and entitled to fly its flag and other
goods extracted or taken by the Party or a person of the Party,
from the waters, seabed, or beneath the seabed in the
continental shelf and the exclusive economic zone of that
Party, provided that Party has the rights to exploit such waters,
seabed, and beneath the seabed, in accordance with
international law;

goods of sea-fishing and other marine goods taken from the
high seas in accordance with international law by any vessels
registered with a Party and entitled to fly the flag of that Party;

goods produced or made on board a factory ship from goods
referred to in subparagraphs (f) and (g), provided such factory
ship is registered with a Party and flying its flag;

goods which are:

(i) waste and scrap resulting from production or

consumption there, provided that such goods can no
longer perform their original purpose nor are capable

32

of being restored or repaired and are fit only for
disposal, for the recovery of raw materials, or for
recycling purposes; or

(ii) used articles collected there which can no longer
perform their original purpose there nor are capable of
being restored or repaired, and which are fit only for
disposal or for the recovery of parts or raw materials;
and

(j) goods obtained or produced there exclusively from goods
referred to in subparagraphs (a) through (i), or from their
derivatives, at any stage of production.

Article 3.4: Not Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

1.

For the purposes of subparagraph (b) of Article 3.2 (Originating
Goods), a good shall be deemed to be originating if the good satisfies
any of the following:

(a) | aChange in Tariff Heading (hereinafter referred to as “CTH”),
which means that all non-originating materials used in the
production of the good have undergone a change in tariff
classification at the four digit level:

(6) a Qualifying Value Content (hereinafter referred to as “QVC”)
of not less than 40% of the FOB value; or

(c) a QVC of not less than 35% of the Ex-Works value.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a good shall be deemed to be
Originating if the good satisfies the Product Specific Rules
(hereinafter referred to as “PSR”). The Parties agree to develop and
implement the Annex on PSR within 12 months from the date of entry
into force of this Agreement.

For the purposes of paragraph 1, the QVC shall be calculated as
follows:

33

(a) FOB

VC FOB Value —V.N.M 100
= —SS/—
Q FOB Value

or
(b) | Ex-Works (EXW)

VC EXW Value —V.N.M 100
= ——— sS—
Q EXW Value

where :

QVC is the qualifying value content of a good, expressed as a
percentage;

FOB is the Free on Board value of the finished good;

EXW is the price paid for the good ex-works to the manufacturer in
the Party in whose undertaking the last working or processing is
carried out, provided the price includes the value of all the materials
used, minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when
the good obtained is exported; and

VNM is the CIF value of the non-originating materials at the time of
importation or the earliest ascertained price paid or payable in the
Party where the production takes place for all non-originating
materials, parts, or produce that are acquired by the producer in the
production of the good. When the producer of a good acquires non-
originating materials within that Party the value of such materials
shall not include freight, insurance, packing costs, and any other
costs incurred in transporting the material from the supplier's
warehouse to the producer’s location.

Article 3.5: Indirect Materials
Any indirect material used in the production of a good shall be treated as

Originating material irrespective of where such indirect material is
Originating.

34

Article 3.6: Non-Qualifying Operations

Notwithstanding any provisions in this Chapter, a good shall not be
considered to be originating in the territory of a Party if only the following
operations are undertaken exclusively by itself or in combination in the
territory of that Party:

(a) | operations to ensure the preservation of products in good
condition during transport and storage such as drying,
freezing, ventilation, chilling, and like operations;

(b) _ sifting, classifying, washing, cutting, slitting, bending, coiling
or uncoiling, sharpening, simple grinding, or slicing;

(Cc) cleaning, including removal of oxide, oil, paint, or other
coverings;

(d) — painting and polishing operations;
(e) — testing or calibration;

(f) placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on
cards or boards, and all other simple packaging operations;

(g) — simple mixing? of goods, whether or not of different kinds;

(h) simple assembly? of parts of products to constitute a complete
good or disassembly of products into parts;

(i) changes of packing, unpacking or repacking operations, and
breaking up and assembly of consignments;

? For the purposes of this Article, “simple mixing” generally describes an activity which does
not need special skills, machine, apparatus or equipment especially produce or install for
carrying out the activity. However, simple mixing does not include chemical reaction.
“Chemical reaction” means a process (including a biochemical process) which results in a
molecule with a new structure by breaking intramolecular bonds and by forming new
intramolecular bonds, or by altering the spatial arrangement of atoms in a molecule.

3 For the purposes of this Article, “simple assembly” generally describes an activity which

does not need special skills, machines, apparatus or equipment especially produced or
installed for carrying out the activity.

35

(j) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like
distinguishing signs on goods or their packaging;

(k) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of
cereals and rice; or

(I) mere dilution with water or another substance that does not
materially alter the characteristics of the goods.

Article 3.7: Accumulation

1.

An originating good of a Party which is used in the processing or
production in the territory of the other Party as material for finished
goods shall be deemed as a material originating in the territory of the
latter Party where the working or processing of the finished goods
has taken place.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1, an originating material from a Party
that does not undergo processing beyond the minimal or non-
qualifying operations listed in Article 3.6 (Non-Qualifying Operations)
in the other Party shall retain its originating status of the former Party.

Article 3.8: Intermediate Goods

For a non-originating material that undergoes sufficient production in the
territory of one or both Parties as provided in Article 3.4 (Not Wholly
Obtained or Produced Goods), the total value of the resulting good shall be
the originating value when that good is used in the subsequent production
of another good.

Article 3.9: De Minimis

1.

A good that does not satisfy a change in tariff classification
requirement as set out in PSR to be agreed pursuant to paragraph 2
of Article 3.4 (Not Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods) shall be
considered as originating if:

(a) the value of all non-originating materials used in the
production of the good that did not undergo the required

36

change in tariff classification does not exceed 10 per cent of
the FOB value of the good; or

(b) = for a good provided for in Chapters 50 through 63 of the HS
Code, the weight or value of all non-originating materials used
in its production that did not undergo the required change in
tariff classification does not exceed 10 per cent of the total
weight or the FOB value of the good,

and the good meets all other applicable criteria set forth in this
Chapter for qualifying as an originating good.

The value of non-originating materials referred to in paragraph 1,
however, shall be included in the value of non-originating materials
for any applicable QVC requirement for the good.

Article 3.10: Identical and Interchangeable Materials

1.

The determination of whether identical and interchangeable
materials are originating shall be made either by physical
segregation of each of the materials, or by the use of generally
accepted accounting principle of stock control or inventory
management practice applicable in the exporting Party.

The inventory management method used under paragraph 1 for
particular identical and interchangeable materials shall continue to
be used for that material throughout the fiscal year.

Article 3.11: Accessories, Spare Parts, and Tools

1.

Accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other information
materials delivered with a good that form part of the good’s standard
accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other information
materials shall be regarded as a part of the good, and shall be
disregarded in determining whether or not all the non-originating
materials used in the production of the originating goods undergo the
applicable change in tariff classification provided that:

(a) — the accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other
information materials are classified with and not invoiced

37

separately from the good; and

(b) — the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts, tools,
and instructional or other information materials presented with
the good are customary for the good.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if the goods are subject to a QVC
requirement, the value of the accessories, spare parts, tools, and
instructional or other information materials shall be taken into
account as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may
be, in calculating the QVC of the goods.

Article 3.12: Treatment of Packages, Packing Materials, and
Containers

1.

If a good is subject to the QVC requirement, the value of the
packages and packing materials for retail sale, shall be taken into
account in determining the origin of such good as originating or non-
originating, as the case may be, provided that the packages and
packing materials are considered to be forming a whole with the
good.

If a good is subject to the change in tariff classification criterion,
packages and packing materials for retail sale classified together
with the packaged good according to the General Rules for the
Interpretation of the Harmonised System, shall not be taken into
account in determining the origin of such good.

Packing materials and containers used exclusively for the
transportation of a good shall not be taken into account in
determining the origin of such good.

Article 3.13: Consignment Criteria

1.

An originating good shall be deemed as directly consigned from the
exporting Party to the importing Party if:

(a) — transported directly from the other Party; or

(b) transported for the purpose of transit through one or more

38

intermediate non-Parties with or without transshipment or
temporary storage in such non-Parties, provided that:

(i) the transit entry is justified for geographical reasons or
by considerations related exclusively to transport
requirements;

(ii) the good have not entered into trade or consumption
there; and

(iii) | the good have not undergone any operation there other
than unloading and reloading or any operation required
to keep them in good condition.

2. For the purposes of implementing paragraph 1 where transportation
is effected through the territory of any non-Party, the customs
authority of the importing Party may require importers who claim the
preferential tariff treatment for the good to submit supporting
documentation, such as:

(a) a single transport document covering the passage from the
exporting Party to the importing Party; or

(b) | supporting documents or any other information, given by the
customs authority of such non-Party or other relevant entities
in evidence that the requirements of subparagraph 1(b) have
been complied with.

Article 3.14: Free Zones
A good produced in a free zone* situated within the territory of a Party shall

be considered an originating good provided that it qualifies as originating
under the provisions of this Chapter.

4 For the purposes of this Article, “free zone” refers to the respective Parties relevant laws
and regulations

39

Article 3.15: Claim for Preferential Tariff Treatment
A claim that a good is eligible for preferential tariff treatment under this
Agreement shall be supported by a Proof of Origin in accordance with Article
3.16 (Proof of Origin).

SECTION B

OPERATIONAL CERTIFICATION PROCEDURES

Article 3.16: Proof of Origin

1. Goods originating in a Party shall, on importation into the other Party,
benefit from preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement on the
basis of a Proof of Origin.

2. Any of the following shall be considered as a Proof of Origin:

(a) a Certificate of Origin in paper format issued by a competent
authority referred to in Article 3.17 (Certificate of Origin in
Paper Format);

(b) an electronic Certificate of Origin issued by a competent
authority and exchanged by a mutually developed electronic
system referred to in Article 3.18 (Electronic Data Origin
Exchange System); or

(c) a Declaration of Origin made out by an approved exporter,
referred to in Article 3.19 (Origin Declaration).

3. The Proof of Origin in paragraph 2 shall be in the English language.

Article 3.17: Certificate of Origin in Paper Format
1. A Certificate of Origin in paper format:

(a) — shall be on A4 size paper and utilise the form in Annex 3A
(Certificate of Origin).

40

(b) may cover one or more goods under one consignment; and

(Cc) shall be in a printed format or such other medium including
electronic format.

2. Each Certificate of Origin shall bear a unique serial reference number
separately given by each place or office of issuance.

3. A Certificate of Origin shall bear an authorised signature and the
official seal of the competent authority. The signature and official seal
may be applied electronically.

4, In case the signature or official seal is applied electronically, a
verification of authenticity, such as QR code or secured website,
shall be included.

Article 3.18: Electronic Data Origin Exchange System

For the purposes of subparagraph 2(b) of Article 3.16 (Proof of Origin), the
Parties shall endeavour to develop an electronic system for the exchange
of information on origin with a view to ensure the effective and efficient
implementation of this Chapter, particularly as regards transmission of
electronic Certificate of Origin.

Article 3.19: Origin Declaration

For the purposes of subparagraph 2(c) of Article 3.16 (Proof of Origin), the
Parties shall endeavour to negotiate and implement provisions allowing
each competent authority to recognise a Declaration of Origin made by an
approved exporter.

Article 3.20: Application for Certificate of Origin

At the time of carrying out the formalities for exporting the good under
preferential treatment, the manufacturer, producer, or exporter of the good,

° For the purposes of this Article, “a printed format” refers to a Certificate of Origin manually
or electronically signed, stamped, and issued in the exporting Party directly from the
competent authority system and printed by competent authority, producer, or exporter, or
his authorised representative.

41

or its authorised representative shall submit a formal application to the
competent authority for the Certificate of Origin together with appropriate
supporting documents proving that the good to be exported qualifies for the
issuance of a Certificate of Origin.

Article 3.21: Examination of an Application for a Certificate of Origin

The competent authority shall, to the best of its competence and ability,
carry out a proper examination in accordance with the laws and regulations
of the exporting Party of each application for a Certificate of Origin to ensure
that:

(a) — the application and the Certificate of Origin is duly completed and
signed by the authorised signatory;

(b) the origin of the good meets the requirements in this Chapter;

(c) the other statements on the Certificate of Origin are consistent with
the supporting documentary evidence that has been submitted;

(d) the HS Code, description, quantity, and value indicated in the
application conform to the good to be exported; and

(e) multiple items declared on the same Certificate of Origin shall be
allowed, provided that each item must qualify separately in its own
right.

Article 3.22: Treatment of Erroneous Declaration in the Certificate of
Origin
Neither erasures nor superimposition shall be allowed on the Certificate of

Origin. Any alterations shall be made by:

(a) — striking out the erroneous material and making any required
modifications. Such modifications shall be approved by a person
authorised to sign the Certificate of Origin and certified by the
appropriate competent authority. Unused spaces shall be crossed
out to prevent any subsequent addition; or

(b) issuing a new Certificate of Origin to replace the erroneous one.

42

Article 3.23: Third Party Invoicing

1.

An importing Party shall not deny a claim for preferential tariff
treatment for the sole reason that an invoice was not issued by the
exporter or producer of a good provided that the good meets the
requirements in this Chapter.

In such circumstances, the exporter of the good shall indicate “third
party invoicing” and the name, address, and country of the company
issuing the invoice shall appear in the Certificate of Origin.

Article 3.24: Issuance of the Certificate of Origin

1.

The Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the competent authority
of the exporting Party prior to or at the time of shipment, or within five
days thereafter.®

In exceptional cases where a Certificate of Origin has not been
issued within the time-periods indicated in paragraph 1, due to
involuntary errors or omissions or other valid causes, the Certificate
of Origin may be issued retroactively, but not more than 12 months
from the date of shipment, in which case it is necessary to indicate
“ISSUED RETROACTIVELY?” in box 14 of Form I-UAE CEPA (Annex
3A).

Article 3.25: Theft, Loss, or Destruction of the Certificate of Origin

1.

In the event of theft, loss, or destruction of a Certificate of Origin, the
manufacturer, producer, exporter, or its authorised representative
may apply to the competent authority that issued it for a certified true
copy of the original Certificate of Origin to be made out on the basis
of the export documents in possession of the competent authority.

The certified true copy of the original Certificate of Origin shall be
endorsed with an official signature and seal and bear the words

° For the purposes of this paragraph, the day of shipment shall not be regarded as part of
the five days period.

43

“CERTIFIED TRUE COPY” in box 12 and indicate the date of
issuance of the original Certificate of Origin, and it shall be issued
within the validity period of the original Certificate of Origin.

Article 3.26: Presentation of the Certificate of Origin

For the purposes of claiming preferential tariff treatment, the importer or its
authorised representative shall submit to the customs authority of the
importing Party, at the time of filing an import declaration, a Certificate of
Origin including supporting documentation and other documents as
required, in accordance with the laws and regulations of the importing Party.

Article 3.27: Validity Period of the Certificate of Origin

The following time limits for the presentation of the Certificate of Origin shall
be observed:

(a)

(b)

(c)

the Certificate of Origin shall be valid for a period of 12 months from
the date of its issuance, and shall be submitted to the customs
authority of the importing Party within its validity period;

where the Certificate of Origin is submitted to the customs authority
of the importing Party after the expiration of the time limit for its
submission, such Certificate of Origin shall be accepted when failure
to observe the time limit results from force majeure or other valid
causes beyond the control of the exporter; and

in all cases, the customs authority in the importing Party may accept
such Certificate of Origin provided that the products have been
imported before the expiration of the time limit of the said Certificate
of Origin.

Article 3.28: Treatment of Minor Discrepancies

1.

The discovery of minor discrepancies between the statements made
in the Certificate of Origin and those made in the documents
submitted to the customs authority of the importing Party for the
purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the goods shall

44

not necessarily invalidate the Certificate of Origin, if it does in fact
correspond to the goods submitted.

For multiple items declared under the same Certificate of Origin, a
problem encountered with one of the items listed shall not affect or
delay the granting of preferential tariff treatment and customs
clearance for the remaining items listed in that Certificate of Origin.
Paragraph 3 of Article 3.30 (Retroactive Check) may be applied to
the problematic items.

Article 3.29: Record-Keeping Requirement

1.

For the purposes of the verification process pursuant to Article 3.30
(Retroactive Check) and Article 3.31 (Verification), the manufacturer,
producer, or exporter applying for the issuance of a Certificate of
Origin shall, subject to the laws and regulations of the exporting
Party, keep the records supporting the application for not less than
four years from the date of issuance of the Certificate of Origin.

The importer shall keep records relevant to the importation in
accordance with the laws and regulations of the importing Party.

The application for a Certificate of Origin and all documents related
to such application shall be retained by the competent authority for
not less than four years from the date of issuance.

Article 3.30: Retroactive Check

1.

The customs authority of the importing Party, through the competent
authority of that Party, may submit a request to the competent
authority of the exporting Party for a retroactive check at random. or
when it has reasonable doubt as to the authenticity of the document
or as to the accuracy of the information regarding the true origin of
the goods in question or of certain parts thereof.

The request shall be accompanied by a copy of the Certificate of
Origin concerned and, unless the retroactive check is requested on
a random basis, the request shall specify the reasons for the request
and any additional information suggesting that the information in the
Certificate of Origin may be inaccurate.

45

The customs authority of the importing Party may suspend the
provisions on preferential tariff treatment on that particular shipment
while awaiting the result of the verification. However, it may release
the goods to the importer subject to any administrative measures
deemed necessary, provided that the goods are not subject to import
prohibition or restriction and there is no suspicion of fraud.

The competent authority of the exporting Party shall respond to
request promptly to a request for a retroactive check and, in any
case, not later than 45 days after the receipt of the request.

When a reply from the competent authority of the exporting Party is
not obtained within 45 days after the receipt of the request pursuant
to paragraph 4, the customs authority of the importing Party may
deny preferential tariff treatment to the good referred to in the
Certificate of Origin that is the subject of the request for a retroactive
check.

Article 3.31: Verification

1.

If the customs authority of the importing Party is not satisfied with the

outcome of the retroactive check, it may, under exceptional

circumstances and for justifiable reasons, request to undertake a

verification visit to the exporting Party.

Prior to conducting a verification visit pursuant to paragraph 1:

(a) | the customs authority of the importing Party shall deliver a
written notification of its intention to conduct the verification
visit simultaneously to:

(i) the producer or exporter whose premises are to be
visited;

(ii) the competent authority of the other Party in the
territory of which the verification visit is to occur; and

(iii) | the importer of the good subject to the verification visit.

(b) — the written notification mentioned in subparagraph (a) shall be

46

(c)

(d)

(e)

as comprehensive as possible and shall include, among
others:

(i) the name of the customs authority issuing the
notification;

(ii) the name of the producer or exporter whose premises
are to be visited;

(iii) | the proposed date of the verification visit;

(iv) the coverage of the proposed verification visit,
including reference to the good subject to the
verification; and

(v) | the names and titles of the officials performing the
verification visit.

the customs authority of the importing Party shall obtain the
written consent from the producer or exporter whose premises
are to be visited;

when the written consent from the producer or exporter is not
obtained within 30 days from the date of receipt of the
notification pursuant to subparagraph (a), the customs
authority of the importing Party may deny preferential tariff
treatment to the good referred to in the Certificate of Origin
that is the subject of the request for a verification visit; and

the customs competent authority receiving the notification
may postpone the proposed verification visit and notify the
customs authority of the importing Party of such intention
within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notification.
Notwithstanding any postponement, any verification visit shall
be carried out within 60 days from the date of receipt of the
notification, or a longer period as the Parties may agree.

The customs authority of the importing Party conducting the
verification visit shall provide the producer or exporter, whose good
is subject to such verification, and the competent authority of the
exporting Party with a written determination of whether or not the
good subject to such verification qualifies as an originating good.

47

Upon the issuance of the written determination referred to in
paragraph 3 that the good qualifies as an originating good, the
customs authority of the importing Party shall immediately restore
preferential benefits and promptly refund the duties paid in excess of
the preferential duty or release guarantees obtained in accordance
with its laws and regulations.

The producer or exporter shall be allowed, 30 days from the date of
receipt of the written determination, to provide in writing comments
or additional information regarding the eligibility of the good for
preferential tariff treatment. If the good is still found to be non-
Originating, the final written determination shall be communicated to
the competent authority of the exporting Party within 30 days from
the date of receipt of the comments or additional information from the
producer or exporter.

The verification visit process, including the actual visit and the
determination under paragraph 3 of whether the good subject to such
verification is originating or not, shall be completed and its results
communicated to the competent authority of the exporting Party
within a maximum six months from the first day of the initial
verification visit was conducted. While the process of verification is
being undertaken, paragraph 3 of Article 3.30 (Retroactive Check)
shall be applied.

Article 3.32: Denial of Preferential Tariff Treatment

1.

The customs authority of the importing Party may deny preferential
tariff treatment where:

(a) | the good does not meet the requirements of this Chapter; or

(b) the importer, exporter, or producer of the good fails to comply
with any of the relevant requirements of this Chapter for
obtaining preferential tariff treatment.

If the customs authority of the importing Party denies a claim for

preferential tariff treatment, it shall provide the decision in writing to
the importer that includes the reasons for the decision.

48

3. The customs authority of the importing Party may determine that a
good does not qualify as an originating good and may deny
preferential tariff treatment where:

(a) | the customs authority of the importing Party has not received
sufficient information to determine that the good is originating;

(b) the exporter, producer, or the competent authority of the
exporting Party fails to respond to a written request for
information in accordance with Article 3.31 (Verification); or

(c) the request for a verification visit in accordance with Article
3.31 (Verification) is refused.

Article 3.33: Contact Points

Each Party shall, within 30 days of the date of entry into force of this
Agreement for that Party, designate one or more contact points for the
implementation of this Chapter and notify the other Party of the contact
details of that contact point or those contact points. Each Party shall
promptly notify the other Party of any change to those contact details.

49

CHAPTER 4

CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TRADE FACILITATION

Article 4.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(d)

customs laws means provisions laid down by legislations and
regulations concerning the importation, exportation, transit of
goods, or any other customs procedures whether relating to
customs duties, taxes or any other charges collected by the
Customs Administrations, or to measures for prohibition,
restriction, or control enforced by the customs authority;

customs procedures means the measures applied by the
customs authority of a Party to goods and to the means of
transport that are subject to its customs laws and regulations;

Customs Mutual Assistance Agreement (CMAA) means
the Agreement on Co-operation and Mutual Administrative
Assistance in Customs Matters, done between the Parties on
24 July 2019;

Authorised Economic Operator(s) (AEQO) means the
program which recognises an operator involved in the
international movement of goods in whatever function that has
been approved by the national customs authority as complying
with the World Customs Organisation (WCO) or equivalent
supply chain security standards;

Mutual Recognition Arrangement (MRA) means_ the
arrangement between the Parties that mutually recognise
AEO authorisations that has been properly granted by one of
the customs authorities; and

persons means both natural and legal person, unless the
context otherwise requires.

56

Article 4.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a)

(d)

(e)

ensure predictability, consistency, and transparency in the
application of the customs laws and regulations of each Party;

promote efficient administration of the customs procedures of
each Party, and the expeditious clearance of goods;

simplify the customs procedures of each Party and harmonise
them to the extent possible with relevant international
standards;

promote cooperation among the customs authorities of the
Parties; and

facilitate trade between the Parties, including through a
strengthened framework for global and regional supply
chains.

Article 4.3: Scope

This Chapter shall apply, in accordance with the respective laws, and
regulations of the Parties, to customs procedures applied to goods traded
between the Parties.

Article 4.4: General Provisions

1. Each Party shall ensure that its customs procedures and practices
are predictable, consistent, transparent, non-discriminatory and
avoid unnecessary procedural obstacles to trade.

2. Each Party shall ensure that its customs procedures, where possible
and to the extent permitted by its customs laws and regulations
conform with the standards and recommended practices of the World
Customs Organisation.

57

The customs authority of each Party shall review its customs
procedures with a view to their further simplification and development
to facilitate trade while ensuring effective control.

Article 4.5: Publication and Enquiry Points

1.

For the purposes of this Chapter, in accordance with its respective
laws and regulations, the customs authority of each Party shall:

(a)

(b)

(d)

ensure that its laws, regulations, guidelines, procedures, and
administrative rulings governing customs matters are promptly
published, either on the Internet or in print form.

designate, establish, and maintain one or more enquiry points
to address enquiries from interested persons pertaining to
customs matters, within its available resources, and shall
endeavour to make available publicly through electronic
means, information concerning procedures for making such
enquiries.

to the extent practicable, and in a manner consistent with its
domestic law and legal system, ensure that new or amended
laws and regulations of general application related to the
movement, release, and clearance of goods, including goods
in transit, are published, or information on them is made
otherwise publicly available, as early as possible before their
entry into force, so that interested parties have the opportunity
to become acquainted with the new or amended laws and
regulations.

information and publications referred to in this Article, to the
extent possible, and in accordance with each Party’s laws and
regulations, shall be made available in the English language.

Nothing in this Article or in any part of this Agreement shall require a
Party to publish law enforcement procedures and internal operational
guidelines including those related to conducting risk analysis and
targeting methodologies.

58

Article 4.6: Risk Management

Each Party shall adopt or maintain a risk management method, that
considers a system for assessment and targeting that enables its customs
authority to focus its inspection activities on high-risk consignments and that
simplifies the clearance and movement of low-risk consignments. Each
Party may also select, on a random basis, consignments for such controls
as part of its risk management.

Article 4.7: Application of Information Technology

1.

Each Party shall endeavour to provide an electronic environment that
supports business transactions between its customs authority and its
trading entities based on internationally accepted standards for
expeditious customs clearance and release of goods.

Each Party shall, to the extent possible, use information technology
that expedites customs procedures for the release of goods,
including the submission of data before the arrival of the shipment of
those goods, as well as electronic or automated systems for risk
management targeting.

Each Party shall endeavour to make its trade administration
documents available to the public in electronic versions.

Each Party shall endeavour to accept trade administration
documents submitted electronically as the legal equivalent of the
paper version of those documents.

In developing initiatives that provide for the use of paperless trade
administration, each Party is encouraged to take into account
international standards or methods made under the auspices of
international organisations, as well as those reflected in the CMAA
signed between the two Parties.

Article 4.8: Advance Rulings

1.

In accordance with its commitments under the WTO Trade
Facilitation Agreement, the customs authority of each Party, upon

59

request, shall issue, prior to the importation of a good into its territory,
an advance ruling, in relation to:

(a) _ tariff classification;
(b) — origin of the goods; and

(c) the application of valuation criteria for a particular case, in
accordance with the application of the provisions set forth in
the Customs Valuation Agreement.

The importing Party shall apply an advance ruling issued by it under
paragraph 1 on the date that the ruling is issued or on a later date
specified in the ruling, and it shall remain in effect for a reasonable
period of time and in accordance with the national procedures on
advanced rulings unless the advance ruling is modified or revoked.

An advance ruling issued by a Party shall be binding on only the
person to whom the ruling is issued.

A Party may decline to issue an advance ruling if the facts and
circumstances forming the basis of the advance ruling are the subject
of a post clearance audit or an administrative, judicial, or quasi-
judicial review or appeal. A Party that declines to issue an advance
ruling shall promptly notify, in writing, the person requesting the
ruling, setting out the relevant facts and circumstances and the basis
for its decision.

The importing Party may modify or revoke an advance ruling:
(a) — if the ruling was based on an error of fact;

(b) if there is a change in the material facts or circumstances on
which the ruling was based;

(c) to conform with a modification of this Chapter; or

(d) to conform with a judicial decision or a change in its domestic
law.

60

Each Party shall provide a written notice to the applicant explaining
the Party’s decision to revoke or modify the advance ruling issued to
the applicant.

Each Party shall provide that any modification or revocation of an
advance ruling shall be effective on the date on which the
modification or revocation is issued, or on such later date as may be
specified therein, and shall not be applied to importations of a good
that have occurred prior to that date, unless the person to whom the
advance ruling was issued has not acted in accordance with its terms
and conditions.

For the issuance of the advance ruling, each Party shall apply its
respective laws and procedures.

Article 4.9: Penalties

1.

Each Party shall maintain measures imposing criminal, civil or
administrative penalties, whether solely or in combination, for
violations of the Party’s customs laws, regulations or procedural
requirements.

Each Party shall ensure that penalties issued for a breach of a
customs law, regulations or procedural requirement are imposed only
on the person(s) responsible for the breach under that Party’s laws.

Each Party shall ensure that the penalty imposed by its customs
authority is dependent on the facts and circumstances of the case
and is commensurate with the degree and severity of the breach.

Each Party shall ensure that it maintains measures to avoid conflicts
of interest in the assessment and collection of penalties and duties.

Each Party shall ensure that if a penalty is imposed by its customs
authority for a breach of a its customs laws, regulation or procedural
requirements, an explanation in writing is provided to the person(s)
upon whom the penalty is imposed specifying the nature of the
breach and the law, regulation or procedure used for determining the
penalty amount.

61

Article 4.10: Release of Goods

1.

In order to facilitate trade between the Parties, each Party shall adopt
or maintain simplified customs procedures for the efficient release of
goods. For greater certainty, this paragraph shall not require a Party
to release a good if the Party’s requirements for release have not
been met.

Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party shall adopt or maintain
procedures that:

(a) provide for the immediate release of goods upon receipt of the
customs declaration and _ fulfilment of all applicable
requirements and procedures;

(b) provide for the electronic submission and processing of
documentation and data, including manifests, prior to the
arrival of the goods in order to expedite the release of goods
from customs control upon arrival;

(c) allow goods to be released at the point of arrival, without
temporary transfer to warehouses or other facilities, provided
all requirements are met; and

(d) require that the importer be informed if a Party does not
promptly release goods, including, to the extent permitted by
its laws and regulations, the reasons why the goods are not
released and which border agency, if not the customs
authority, has withheld release of the goods.

Each Party may allow, to the extent practicable, goods intended for
importation to be moved within its territory under customs control
from the point of entry into the Party’s territory to another customs
office in its territory from where the goods are intended to be
released, provided the applicable regulatory requirements are met.

Article 4.11: Authorised Economic Operators

In order to facilitate trade and enhance compliance and risk management
between them, the Parties agreed to implement the MRA of their respective
Authorised Economic Operator (AEO) programs.

62

Article 4.12: Border Agency Cooperation

The Parties shall ensure that their authorities and agencies responsible for
border controls and procedures dealing with the importation, exportation,
and transit of goods cooperate with one another and coordinate their
activities in order to facilitate trade pursuant to this Chapter.

Article 4.13: Expedited Shipments

Each Party shall adopt or maintain expedited customs procedures for goods
entered through air cargo facilities while maintaining appropriate customs
control. These procedures shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

provide for information necessary to release an express
shipment to be submitted and processed before the shipment
arrives;

allow a single submission of information covering all goods
contained in an express shipment, such as a manifest, if
possible, through electronic means;’

to the extent possible, provide for the release of certain goods
with a minimum of documentation;

under normal circumstances, provide for express shipments
to be released as soon as possible after submission of the
necessary customs documents, provided that the shipment
has arrived;

apply to shipments of any weight or value recognising that a
Party may require formal entry procedures as a condition for
release, including declaration and supporting documentation
and payment of customs duties, based on the good’s weight
or value; and

provide that, under normal circumstances, no customs duties
will be assessed on express shipments valued at or below a

’ Additional documents may be required as a condition for release.

63

fixed amount set under the Party’s law.8 Each Party shall
review the amount taking into account factors that it may
consider relevant.

Article 4.14: Review and Appeal

1.

Each Party shall provide that any person to whom its customs
authority issues an administrative decision has the right, within its
territory, to:

(a) an administrative appeal to, or review by, an administrative
authority higher than, or independent of, the official or office
that issued the decision; and

(b) | a judicial appeal or review of the decision.

Each Party shall ensure that its procedures for appeal and review are
carried out in a non-discriminatory and timely manner.

Each Party shall ensure than an authority conducting a review or
appeal under paragraph 1 notifies the person in writing of its
determination or decision in the review or appeal, and the reasons
for the determination or decision.

The legislation of a Party may require that an administrative appeal
or review be initiated prior to a judicial appeal or review.

Each Party shall ensure that, in a case where the decision on appeal
or review under subparagraph 1(a) is not given either:

(a) — within set periods as specified in its laws or regulations; or

(b) without undue delay, the petitioner has the right to either
further appeal to, or further review by, the administrative
authority or the judicial authority or any other recourse to the
judicial authority.

8 Notwithstanding this Article, a Party may assess customs duties, or may require formal
entry documents, for restricted or controlled goods, such as goods subject to import
licensing or similar requirements.

64

Each Party shall ensure that the person referred to in paragraph 1 is
not treated unfavourably merely because that person seeks review
of an administrative decision referred to in paragraph 1.

Each Party is encouraged to make the obligations in this Article
applicable to administrative decisions issued by a relevant border
agency other than its customs authority.

The decision, and the reasons for the decision, of an administrative
or judicial review or appeal shall be provided in writing.

Article 4.15: Customs Cooperation

1.

With a view to-further enhancing customs cooperation and exchange
of information between their customs authorities to secure and
facilitate lawful trade, each Party shall implement and comply with
the obligations in the CMAA.

The Parties shall facilitate initiatives for the exchange of information
on best practices in relation to the implementation and management
of customs procedures described in this Chapter, and in accordance
with the CMAA.

Article 4.16: Confidentiality

1.

Any information received under this Agreement shall be treated as
confidential pursuant to the terms of the CMAA.

Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with its laws and
regulations, the confidentiality of information obtained pursuant to
this Chapter and shall protect that information from disclosure that
could prejudice the competitive position of the persons providing the
information.

65

CHAPTER 5

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

Article 5.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(b)

the definitions provided in Annex A of the SPS Agreement
shall apply;

competent authority means those authorities within each
Party recognised by the national government as responsible
for developing and administering the sanitary and
phytosanitary measures within that Party and;

emergency measure means a sanitary or phytosanitary
measure that is applied by an importing Party to the other
Party to address an urgent problem of human, animal or plant
life or health protection that arises or threatens to arise in the
Party applying the measure.

Article 5.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a)

(e)

protect human, animal, or plant life or health in the territories
of the Parties while facilitating trade between them;

enhance the implementation of the SPS Agreement;
strengthen communication, consultation, and cooperation
between the Parties, and particularly between the Parties’

competent authorities;

ensure that sanitary or phytosanitary measures implemented
by a Party do not create unnecessary barriers to trade;

enhance transparency in and understanding of the application
of each Party’s sanitary and phytosanitary measures; and

66

(f) encourage the development and adoption of science-based
international standards, guidelines, and recommendations,
and promote their implementation by the Parties.

Article 5.3: Scope

This Chapter shall apply to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures of a
Party that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade between the Parties.

Article 5.4: General Provision

The Parties affirm their rights and obligations with respect to each other
under the SPS Agreement, and to this end, the SPS Agreement is
incorporated into and made a part of this agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 5.5: Competent Authorities and Contact Points

1. |The Parties shall exchange information on the application of sanitary
and phytosanitary measures with regard to regulations, standards and
procedures through designated competent authorities and contact
points.

2. Each Party shall provide the other Party with a written description of
the sanitary and phytosanitary responsibilities of its competent
authorities, the contact points within each of these authorities, and the
name and contact information of its primary representative. Each Party
shall keep this information up to date.

Article 5.6: Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and operation of this
Chapter, the Parties hereby establish a Committee on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures (“Committee”), composed of government
representatives of each Party responsible for sanitary and
phytosanitary matters. The Committee shall carry out its work under
the direction of the Joint Committee.

2. The objectives of the Committee are to:

67

(a) | enhance each Party’s implementation of this Chapter;

(b) consider sanitary and phytosanitary matters of mutual interest;
and

(c) enhance communication and cooperation on sanitary and
phytosanitary matters

3. The Committee shall establish its terms of reference at its first
meeting and may revise those terms as needed. The Committee
shall thereafter meet as needed at its own discretion or at the
direction of the Joint Committee.

4. The Committee is intended to serve as a forum to:

(a) improve the Parties’ understanding of sanitary and
phytosanitary issues that relate to the implementation of the
SPS Agreement and this Chapter;

(b) enhance mutual understanding of each Party’s sanitary and
phytosanitary measures and the regulatory processes that
relate to those measures;

(c) exchange information on the implementation of this Chapter;

(d) — share information on a sanitary or phytosanitary issue that has
arisen between them.

5. If a Party considers that there is a disruption to trade on sanitary and
phytosanitary grounds, it may request technical consultations
through the Committee on an urgent basis with a view to facilitating
trade. On receiving a request under this paragraph, the other Party
will endeavour to provide any requested information and respond to
questions pertaining to the matter, and if requested, enter into
technical consultations within a reasonable period of time after
receiving such a request. The Parties shall make every effort to
reach a _ mutually satisfactory resolution through _ technical
consultations within a period of time agreed upon by the Parties.

68

Article 5.7: Equivalence

1.

The Parties recognise that the principle of equivalence as provided
for under Article 4 of the SPS Agreement, has mutual benefits for
both exporting and importing countries.

The Parties shall follow the procedures for determining the
equivalence of SPS measures and standards developed by the WTO
SPS Committee and relevant international standard setting bodies
as referred to in Annex A of the SPS Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Compliance by an exported product with an SPS measure or
standard that has been accepted as equivalent to SPS measures or
standards of the importing Party shall not remove the need for that
product to comply with any other relevant mandatory requirements of
the importing Party.

Article 5.8: Emergency Measures

1.

If a Party adopts an emergency measure that is necessary for the
protection of human, animal or plant life or health, the Party shall
promptly notify the other Party of that measure through the primary
representative and the relevant contact point referred to in Article 5.5
(Competent Authorities and Contact Points). The importing Party
shall take into consideration any information provided by the other
Party in response to the notification.

If a Party adopts an emergency measure referred to in paragraph 1,
it shall ensure that the emergency measure is not maintained without
scientific evidence and shall review the scientific basis of that
measure within a reasonable period of time or, promptly on the
request of the other Party, and make available the results of the
review to the other Party on request. If the emergency measure is
maintained after the review, because the reason for its adoption
remains, the Party should review the measure periodically.

Article 5.9: Transparency

1.

The Parties recognise the value of transparency in the adoption and
application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures and the

69

importance of sharing information about such measures on an
Ongoing basis.

In implementing this Article, each Party should take into account
relevant guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international
standards, guidelines and recommendations.

Each Party agrees to notify a proposed sanitary or phytosanitary
measure that may have an effect on the trade of the other Party,
including any that conforms to international standards, guidelines, or
recommendations, by using the WTO SPS notification submission
system as a means of notification.

Unless urgent problems of human, animal or plant life or health
protection arise or threaten to arise, or the measure is of a trade-
facilitating nature, the Party proposing a sanitary or phytosanitary
measure shall normally allow at least 60 days for the other Party to
provide written comments on the proposed measure, other than
proposed legislation, after it makes a notification under paragraph 3.
If feasible and appropriate, the Party proposing the measure should
allow more than 60 days. The Party shall consider any reasonable
request from the other Party to extend the comment period. On
request of the other Party, the Party proposing the measure shall
respond to the written comments of the other Party in an appropriate
manner.

A Party that proposes to adopt a sanitary or phytosanitary measure
shall discuss with the other Party, on request and if appropriate and
feasible, any scientific or trade concerns that the other Party may
raise regarding the proposed measure and the availability of
alternative, less trade-restrictive approaches for achieving the
objective of the measure.

The Parties encourage the publication, by electronic means including
in a website, of the proposed sanitary or phytosanitary measure
notified under paragraph 3 and the legal basis for the measure, and
the written comments or a summary of the written comments that the
Party has received from the public on the measure.

Each Party shall notify the other Party of final sanitary or

phytosanitary measures through the WTO SPS _ notification
submission system. Each Party shall ensure that the text or the

70

9.

notice of a final sanitary or phytosanitary measure specifies the date
on which the measure takes effect and the legal basis for the
measure. Each Party shall publish, preferably by electronic means,
including in a website, notices of final sanitary or phytosanitary
measures.

An exporting Party shall notify the importing Party through the contact
points referred to in Article 5.5 (Competent Authorities and Contact
Points) in a timely and appropriate manner:

(a) if it has knowledge of a significant sanitary or phytosanitary
risk related to the export of a good from its territory;

(b) of urgent situations where a change in animal or plant health
status in the territory of the exporting Party may affect current
trade;

(c) of significant changes in the status of a regionalised pest or
disease;

(d) of new scientific findings of importance which affect the
regulatory response with respect to food safety, pests or
diseases; and

(e) of significant changes in food safety, pest or disease
management, control or eradication policies or practices that
may affect current trade.

A Party shall provide to the other Party, on request, all sanitary or
phytosanitary measures related to the importation of a good into that
Party’s territory.

Article 5.10: Cooperation

1.

The Parties shall cooperate on sanitary and phytosanitary matters to
protect human, animal, fish and plant life, or, health through their
respective competent authorities.

The Parties shall explore opportunities for cooperation and

collaboration in e-certification, technical assistance, best practices,
joint research, and other areas of mutual interest.

71

CHAPTER 6

STANDARDS, TECHNICAL REGULATIONS AND CONFORMITY
ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES (STRACAP)

Article 6.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms and their definitions, including
the chapeau and explanatory notes, provided in Annex 1 of the TBT
Agreement shall apply mutatis mutandis.

Article 6.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to facilitate trade in goods between the
Parties by:

(a) — ensuring that standards, technical regulations, and conformity
assessment procedures do not create unnecessary obstacles
to trade;

(b) |= promoting mutual understanding of each Party's standards,
technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures;

(c) strengthening information exchange and cooperation between
the Parties in relation to the preparation, adoption and
application of standards, technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures;

(d) — strengthening cooperation between the Parties in the work of
international bodies related to standardisation and conformity
assessments; and

(e) providing a framework to implement supporting mechanisms
to realise these objectives.

72

Article 6.3: Scope

1.

This Chapter shall apply to the preparation, adoption and application
of all standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures that may affect trade in goods between the Parties.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1, this Chapter shall not apply to:

(a) — sanitary and phytosanitary measures, as defined in Chapter 5
(Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures); and

(b) purchasing specifications prepared by governmental bodies
for production or consumption requirements of governmental
bodies.

Each Party shall take such reasonable measures as may be
available to it to ensure compliance, in the implementation of this
Chapter, by local governments and non-governmental bodies within
its territory that are responsible for the preparation, adoption and
application of standards, technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures.

Nothing in this Chapter shall limit the right of a Party to prepare,
adopt, and apply standards, technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures only to the extent necessary to fulfil a
legitimate objective. Such legitimate objectives include, inter alia,
national security requirements; the prevention of deceptive practices;
the protection of human health or safety; animal or plant life or health;
or the environment.

Article 6.4: Affirmation of the WTO TBT Agreement

1.

The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to
each other under the TBT Agreement, of which Articles 2 through 6,
and Article 9 as well as Annex 3 are incorporated into and made part
of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under

Chapter 16 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this
Chapter if the dispute concerns:

73

(a) exclusively claims made under the provisions under
paragraph 1 of the TBT Agreement incorporated; or

(b) =a measure that a Party alleges to be inconsistent with this
Chapter that was referred to, or is subsequently referred to, a
WTO dispute settlement panel or was taken to comply in
response to a ruling of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body.

Article 6.5: Standards

1.

The Parties recognising the important role that international
standards, guides, and recommendations can play in supporting
greater regulatory alignment and in reducing unnecessary barriers to
trade.

With respect to the preparation, adoption and application of
standards, each Party shall ensure that its standardising body accept
and complies with Annex 3 to the TBT Agreement.

To determine whether there is an international standard, guide, or
recommendation within the meaning of Articles 2 and 5 and Annex 3
of the TBT Agreement, each Party shall apply the TBT Committee
Decision on International Standards.

No Party shall accord any preference to the consideration or use of
standards that are developed through processes that:

(a) are inconsistent with the TBT Committee Decision on
International Standards; or

(b) treat persons of the other Party less favourably than persons
whose domicile is the same as the standardisation body.

Article 6.6: Technical Regulations

1.

Where relevant international standards exist or their completion is
imminent, each Party shall use them, or relevant parts of them, as a
basis for their technical regulations except when such international
standards or relevant parts would be an ineffective or inappropriate
means for the fulfilment of the legitimate objectives pursued, for

74

instance because of fundamental climatic or geographical factors or
fundamental technological problems.

If a Party has not used such international standards or relevant parts
of them, as a basis for a technical regulation, a Party shall, on request
from the other Party, explain why it has not used a relevant
international standard or has_ substantially deviated from an
international standard.

Each Party shall give positive consideration to accepting as
equivalent, technical regulations of the other Party, even if these
regulations differ from its own, provided it is satisfied that these
regulations adequately fulfil the objectives of its own regulations.

If a Party does not accept a technical regulation of the other Party as
equivalent to its own, it shall, on request of the other Party, explain
the reasons for its decision within a reasonable period of time.

In implementing paragraph 2 of Article 2 of the TBT Agreement, each
Party shall consider available alternatives in order to ensure that the
proposed technical regulations to be adopted are not more trade-
restrictive than necessary to fulfil a legitimate objective.

Each Party shall uniformly and consistently apply its technical
regulations that are prepared and adopted in a manner consistent
with the provisions of the TBT Agreement to its whole territory.

On the request of a Party that has an interest in developing a
technical regulation similar to a technical regulation of the other
Party, the other Party shall endeavour to provide, to the extent
practicable, relevant information, including studies or documents,
except for confidential information, on which it has relied in its
development.

Consistent with the obligations of the TBT Agreement each Party
shall ensure that its technical regulations concerning labels:

(a) | accord treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like
goods of national origin; and

(b) do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade between the
Parties.

75

Article 6.7: Conformity Assessment Procedures

1.

Each Party shall ensure, whenever possible, that results of
conformity assessment procedures in the other Party are accepted,
even when those procedures differ from its own, unless those
procedures do not offer an assurance of conformity with applicable
technical regulations or standards equivalent to its own procedures.

A Party shall, on request of the other Party, explain its reason for not
accepting the results. The Parties may consult with each other on
matters such as the technical competence of the conformity
assessments bodies involved.

Each Party recognises that, depending on the situation of the Party
and the specific sectors involved, a broad range of mechanisms may
exist to facilitate the acceptance of the results of conformity
assessment procedures conducted in the other Party. Such
mechanisms may include, but not limited to:

(a) recognition of cooperative arrangements between
accreditation bodies in the territory of each Party;

(b) promotion of mutual recognition of conformity assessment
procedures conducted by accredited conformity assessment
bodies located in the territory of the other Party;

(c) use of existing regional and_ international multilateral
recognition agreements and arrangements;

(d) designation by the government of a Party of conformity
assessment bodies located in the territory of the other Party to
perform conformity assessment procedures;

(e) | acceptance of a manufacture’s or supplier's declaration of
conformity where appropriate and mutually agreed; and

(f) other mechanisms as mutually agreed.

76

Article 6.8: Transparency

1.

The Parties recognise the importance of the provisions relating to
transparency in the TBT Agreement. In this respect, the Parties shall
take into account relevant decisions and recommendations in the
Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the WTO Committee
on Technical Barriers to Trade since 1 January 1995
(G/TBT/1/Rev.13) and 24 September 2019 (G/TBT/1/Rev.14), as
may be revised, issued by the WTO TBT Committee.

Each Party affirms its commitment to ensuring that information
regarding proposed new or amended technical regulations and
conformity assessment procedures is made available in accordance
with the relevant requirements of the TBT Agreement.

Each Party shall ensure that the information relating to standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures is
published. Such information should be made available in electronic
form and, where possible, in printed form.

Article 6.9: Cooperation

1.

The Parties shall strengthen their cooperation in the field of
standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures, consistent with the objectives of this Chapter.

Each Party shall, on request of the other Party, give positive
consideration to proposals for cooperation on matters of mutual
interest on standards, technical regulations and _ conformity
assessment procedures.

Such cooperation, which shall be mutually agreed by both Parties,
may include:

(a) provision of advice, technical assistance, or capacity building
relating to the development and application of standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

(b) cooperation between conformity assessment bodies, in the
Parties, on matters of mutual interest;

77

(c) | cooperation in areas of mutual interest in the work of relevant
regional and international bodies relating to the development
and application of standards and conformity assessment
procedures, such as_ enhancing participation in the
frameworks for mutual recognition developed by relevant
regional and international bodies;

(d) | enhancing cooperation in the development and improvement
of standards, technical regulations and _ conformity
assessment procedures;

(e) increasing the mutual understanding of the Parties’ respective
systems and mechanisms for standards, technical regulation
and conformity assessment procedures;

(f) facilitating trade by good regulatory practices; and

(g) enhancing cooperation, as appropriate, to ensure that
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures
are based on international standards or the relevant parts of
them and do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade
between the Parties.

Each Party shall, on request of the other Party, give consideration to
sector-specific proposals for cooperation based on mutual benefit
under this Chapter.

Article 6.10: Information Exchange and Technical Discussions

1.

A Party may request that the other Party provide information on any
matter arising under this Chapter. A Party receiving a request under
this paragraph shall provide that information within a reasonable
period of time, and if possible, by electronic means.

Each Party shall give prompt and positive consideration to any
request from the other Party for technical discussions on any matter
arising from this Chapter.

On a request of a Party for technical discussions on any matter
arising under this Chapter, the Parties shall agree to enter into

78

technical discussions by notifying the contact points established
under Article 6.11 (Contact Points).

Technical discussions shall be carried out by the Parties within 30
days of the receipt of the request made under paragraph 1, unless
the Parties otherwise agree, with a view to reaching a mutually
satisfactory solution of the matter as expeditiously as possible.
Technical discussions may be conducted via any means agreed by
the Parties.

Article 6.11: Contact Points

1.

Each Party shall designate a contact point who will be responsible
for coordinating the implementation of this Chapter within 60 days of
the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Each Party shall ensure that its contact point facilitate the exchange
of information between the Parties on standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures in response to all
reasonable requests for such information from the other Party.

All communications under this Chapter shall be made through the
contact points, including facilitating discussions, requests, and the
timely exchange of information on matters arising under this Chapter.

Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party of any change to its
contact point or the details of the relevant officials.

Article 6.12: Committee on STRACAP

1.

The Parties hereby establish a Committee on STRACAP under the
Joint Committee, which shall comprise of representatives of each
Party.

The Committee shall meet as mutually agreed by the Parties.
Meetings may be conducted in person, or by any other means as
mutually agreed by the Parties.

The functions of the Committee may include:

79

monitoring the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

coordinating cooperation pursuant to Article 6.9
(Cooperation);

facilitating technical discussions;

reporting its findings to the Joint Committee, where
appropriate; and

carrying out other functions as may be delegated by the Joint
Committee.

80

CHAPTER 7

TRADE REMEDIES

Article 7.1: Scope

1. With respect to the UAE, this Chapter shall apply to investigations
and measures that are taken under the authority of the Minister of
Economy pursuant to Articles 2, 3, 4, and 8 of Federal Law No. 1 of
2017 on Anti-dumping, Countervailing and Safeguard Measures.

2. With respect to Indonesia, this Chapter shall apply to investigations
and measures that are taken under the Government Regulation No.
34 of 2011 on Anti-dumping, Countervailing and Safeguard
Measures, including its subsequent amendments and replacements.

Article 7.2: Anti-Dumping and Countervailing Measures
General

1. The Parties recognise the right to apply measures consistent with
Article VI of the GATT 1994, the Anti-Dumping Agreement, and the
SCM Agreement, as well as the importance of promoting
transparency in anti-dumping and countervailing duty proceedings
and ensuring the opportunity of all interested parties to participate
meaningfully in such proceedings.

2. Except for paragraph 4, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed
to impose any rights or obligations on a Party with respect to anti-
dumping or countervailing duty measures.

3. Neither Party may have recourse to dispute settlement under
Chapter 16 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this
Article.

Practices Relating to Anti-dumping and Countervailing Duty Proceedings

4, The Parties recognise the following practices as promoting the goals

of transparency and due process in anti-dumping and countervailing
duty proceedings:

81

(b)

(c)

upon receipt by a Party’s investigating authorities of a properly
documented anti-dumping or countervailing duty application
with respect to imports from the other Party, and no later than
10 days before initiating an investigation, the Party shall
provide written notification of its receipt of the application to
the other Party.

immediately after a Party accepts an anti-dumping or
countervailing duty application, and in any event before the
Party initiates an investigation, the Party shall invite the other
Party, to hold consultations, with the aim of clarifying the
situation as to the matters referred to in the application.

without prejudice to the obligation to afford reasonable
opportunity for consultation, these provisions regarding
consultations are not intended to prevent the authorities of a
Party from proceeding expeditiously with regard to initiating
the investigation, reaching preliminary or final determinations,
whether affirmative or negative, or from applying provisional
or final measures, in accordance with its laws and regulations.

in any proceeding in which the investigating authorities
determine to conduct an on-spot verification of information that
is provided by a respondent?, the investigating authorities shall
promptly notify each respondent of their intent, and:

(i) provide to each respondent at least 14 working days
advance notice of the dates on which the authorities
intend to conduct an on-spot verification of the
information; and

(ii) | at least seven working days prior to an on-spot
verification, provide to the respondent a document that
sets out the topics the respondent should be prepared
to address during the verification and that describes the
types of supporting documentation to be made
available for the purpose of verification.

° For the purposes of this paragraph, “respondent” refers to a producer, manufacturer,
exporter, importer, and, where appropriate, a government or government entity, that
submits the response to the investigating authorities of Anti-dumping or countervailing duty’

questionnaires.

82

(f)

(g)

if, in an anti-dumping or countervailing duty action that
involves imports from the other Party, a Party’s investigating
authorities determine that a timely response to a request for
information does not comply with the request, the investigating
authorities shall inform the interested party that submitted the
response of the nature of the deficiency and, to the extent
practicable in light of time limits established to complete the
anti-dumping or countervailing duty action, provide that
interested party with an opportunity to remedy or explain the
deficiency. If that interested party submits further information
in response to that deficiency and the investigating authorities
find that the response is not satisfactory, or that the response
is not submitted within the applicable time limits, and if the
investigating authorities disregard all or part of the original and
subsequent responses, the investigating authorities shall
explain in the determination or otherwise in writing the reasons
for disregarding the information.

without prejudice to paragraph 5 of Article 6 of the Anti-
Dumping Agreement and paragraph 4 of Article 12 of the SCM
Agreement, the investigating authorities shall ensure that in
any case before the determination is made, full and
meaningful disclosure to interested parties of all essential
facts and considerations which form the basis for the decision
to apply measures. Disclosures shall be made in writing and
allow interested parties sufficient time to make their
comments.

the disclosure of the essential facts shall contain in particular:

(i) in the case of an anti-dumping investigation, the
margins of dumping established, a sufficiently detailed
explanation of the basis and methodology upon which
normal values and export prices were established, and
of the methodology used to compare the normal values
and export prices, including any adjustments;

(ii) in the case of a countervailing duty investigation, the
determination of countervailable subsidisation,
including sufficient details on the calculation of the
amount and methodology followed to determine the
existence of subsidisation; and

83

(iii) information relevant to the determination of injury,
including information concerning the volume of the
dumped or subsidised imports and the effect of the
dumped or subsidised imports on prices in the domestic
market for like goods, the detailed methodology used in
the calculation of price undercutting, the consequent
impact of the dumped or subsidised imports on the
domestic industry, and the demonstration of a causal
relationship, including the examination of factors other
than the dumped or subsidised imports.

Article 7.3: Bilateral-Safeguard Measures

Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Article:

(a)

(b)

bilateral safeguard measure means a measure described in
paragraph 2.

domestic industry means, with respect to an imported good,
the producers as a whole of the like or directly competitive
good operating within the territory of a Party, or those
producers whose collective production of the like or directly
competitive good constitutes a major proportion of the total
domestic production of that good;

serious injury means a significant overall impairment in the
position of a domestic industry;

threat of serious injury means serious injury that, on the
basis of facts and not merely on allegation, conjecture, or
remote possibility, is clearly imminent;

transition period means, in relation to a particular good, the
period of the staged tariff elimination for that good; and

84

General

2.

If, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under
this Agreement, an originating good of the other Party is being
imported into the territory of a Party in such increased quantities, in
absolute terms or relative to domestic production, and under such
conditions that the imports of such originating good from the other
Party causes serious injury, or threat thereof, to a domestic industry
producing a like or directly competitive good, the Party may:

(a)

(b)

suspend the further reduction of any rate of customs duty on
the good provided for under this Agreement;

increase the rate of customs duty on the good to a level not to
exceed the lesser of:

(i) the most-favoured-nation (MFN) applied rate of duty on
the good in effect at the time the action is taken; or

(ii) the MFN applied rate of duty on the good in effect on
the day immediately preceding the date this Agreement
enters into force.

Notification and Consultation

3.

Each Party shall notify the other Party in writing in the English
language:

(a)

(b)

(c)

immediately on initiation of an investigation described in
paragraph 5;

immediately upon making a finding of serious injury or threat
thereof caused by increased imports;

before applying provisional measures pursuant to paragraph
12; and

no less than 20 days in advance of applying a definitive

safeguard measure or extending a bilateral safeguard
measure.

85

Each Party shall consult with the other Party as far, in advance of
applying a bilateral safeguard measure, as practicable, with a view
to reviewing the information arising from the investigation and
exchanging views on the measure.

Conditions and Limitations

5.

Each Party shall apply a bilateral safeguard measure only following
an investigation by the Party’s competent authorities in accordance
with Articles 3 and subparagraph 2(c) of Article 4 of the Safeguards
Agreement, and to this end, Articles 3 and subparagraph 2(c) of
Article 4 of the Safeguards Agreement are incorporated into and
made a part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

In the investigation described in paragraph 5, the Party shall comply
with the requirements of subparagraph 2(a) of Article 4 of the
Safeguards Agreement, and to this end, subparagraph 2(a) of Article
4 of the Safeguards Agreement is incorporated into and made a part
of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities complete any
such investigation within one year of its date of initiation.

Neither Party may apply a bilateral safeguard measure:

(a) except to the extent, and for such time, as may be necessary
to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate
adjustment;

(b) fora period exceeding two years, except that the period may
be extended by up to one year if the competent authorities of
the importing Party determine, in conformity with the
procedures specified in this Article, that the measure
continues to be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury
and to facilitate adjustment and that there is evidence that the
industry is adjusting, provided that the total period of
application of a bilateral safeguard measure, including the
period of initial application and any extension thereof, shall not
exceed three years; or

(c) beyond the expiration of the transition period.

86

10.

11.

No bilateral safeguard measure shall be applied to the import of a
product which has been previously subject to such measure for a
period of time equal to the period during which the previous measure
was applied.

When the expected duration of the bilateral safeguard measure is
greater than one year, the importing Party shall progressively
liberalise it at regular intervals.

When a Party terminates a bilateral safeguard measure, the rate of
customs duty shall be the rate that, according to the Party’s Schedule
in Annex 2A (Schedule of Tariff Commitments), would have been in
effect but for the measure.

Provisional Measures

12.

13.

14.

15.

In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage that
would be difficult to repair, a Party may apply a bilateral safeguard
measure on a provisional basis pursuant to a_ preliminary
determination by its competent authorities that there is clear
evidence that imports of an originating good from the other Party
have increased as the result of the reduction or elimination of a
customs duty under this Agreement, and such imports have caused
serious injury, or threat thereof, to the domestic industry.

If a Party’s competent authorities make a preliminary determination,
the Party shall make such determination available to interested
parties, and shall provide interested parties at least 15 days after
such disclosure to comment and submit their arguments with respect
to such determinations. A Party may not apply a provisional measure
until at least 45 days after the date its competent authorities initiate
an investigation.

The duration of any provisional measure shall not exceed 200 days,
during which time the Party shall comply with the requirements of
paragraphs 5 and 6.

A Party shall promptly refund any tariff increases if the investigation
described in paragraph 5 does not result in a finding that the
requirements of paragraph 2 are met. The duration of any provisional
measure shall be counted as part of the period described in
subparagraph 8(b).

87

Compensation

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

No later than 30 days after it applies a bilateral safeguard measure,
a Party shall afford an opportunity for the other Party to consult with
it regarding appropriate trade liberalising compensation in the form
of concessions having substantially equivalent trade effects or
equivalent to the value of the additional duties expected to result from
the bilateral safeguard measure. The applying Party shall provide
such compensation as the Parties mutually agree.

If the Parties are unable to agree on compensation within 30 days
after consultations begin, the Party against whose originating good
the measure is applied may suspend the application of concessions
with respect to originating goods of the applying Party that have trade
effects substantially equivalent to the bilateral safeguard measure.
The Party exercising the right of suspension may suspend the
application of concessions only for the minimum period necessary to
achieve the substantially equivalent effects.

A Party against whose originating good the bilateral safeguard
measure is applied shall notify the Party applying the bilateral
safeguard measure in writing at least 30 days before it suspends
concessions in accordance with paragraph 17.

The right of suspension referred in paragraph 17 shall not be
exercised for the first 24 months during which a bilateral safeguard
measure is in effect, provided that the safeguard measure has been
applied as a result of an absolute increase in imports and conforms
to the provisions of this Agreement.

The applying Party’s obligation to provide compensation under
paragraph 16 and the other Party’s right to suspend concessions
under paragraph 17 shall terminate on the date the bilateral
safeguard measure terminates.

Article 7.4: Global Safeguard Measures

1.

The Parties maintain their rights and obligations under Article XIX of
GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement.

88

Actions taken pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the
Safeguards Agreement shall not be subject to Chapter 16 (Dispute
Settlement).

Neither Party may apply, with respect to the same good, at the same
time:

(a) a bilateral safeguard measure as provided in Article 7.3
(Bilateral-Safeguard Measures); and

(6) a measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the
Safeguards Agreement.

Article 7.5: Committee on Trade Remedies

1.

The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade Remedies,
under the Joint Committee, which shall comprise of representatives
at an appropriate level from the relevant authorities of each Party
who have responsibility for trade remedies matters.

The Committee shall meet as and when necessary upon agreement
by the Parties.

Article 7.6: Cooperation in Trade Remedies Investigations

The Parties’ shall seek to cooperate within the context of this Chapter with
a view to, inter alia:

(a) | enhance each Party’s knowledge and understanding of the
other Party’s trade remedy laws, policies, and practices;

(b) oversee the implementation of this Chapter;

(c) improve cooperation between the Parties’ authorities having
responsibility for trade remedy matters;

(d) — provide a forum for the Parties to exchange information, to the
extent possible, on issues relating to anti-dumping, subsidies
and countervailing measures; and to discuss other relevant
topics of mutual interest as the Parties may agree;

89

(e) develop educational programs related to the administration of
trade remedy laws and regulations; and

(f) enhance the Parties knowledge and understanding of anti-
circumvention in the implementation of anti-dumping and
countervailing duty measures.

Article 7.7: Use of the English language
In order to ensure the maximum efficiency for the application of the trade
remedies rules under this Chapter, the investigating authorities of each

Party should use the English language for communications’? issued in the
context of trade remedies investigations between the Parties.

1° For the purposes of this Article, “Communications” refers to questionnaire replies, written
submissions, and letters.

90

CHAPTER 8

TRADE IN SERVICES

Article 8.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(c)

commercial presence means any type of business or
professional establishment, including through:

(i)

(ii)

the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a
juridical person; or

the creation or maintenance of a _ branch or
representative office within the territory of a Party for
the purpose of supplying a service;

juridical person means any legal entity duly constituted or
otherwise organised under applicable law, whether for profit
or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or governmentally-
owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint
venture, sole proprietorship or association;

juridical person of the other Party means a juridical person
which is either:

(i)

(ii)

constituted or otherwise organised under the law of that
other Party, and is engaged in substantive business
operations in the territory of:

(a) that Party; or

(b) any Member of the WTO and is owned or controlled
by natural persons of that other Party or by juridical
persons that meet all the conditions’ of
subparagraph (i)(a); or

in the case of the supply of a service through
commercial presence, owned or controlled by:

91

(e)

(f)

(a) natural persons of that Party; or

(b) juridical persons of that other Party identified
under subparagraph (i);

a juridical person is:

(i) "owned" by persons of a Party if more than 50 percent
of the equity interest in it is beneficially owned by
persons of that Party;

(ii) "controlled" by persons of a Party if such persons have
the power to name a majority of its directors or
otherwise to legally direct its actions; or

(iii) | "affiliated" with another person when it controls, or is
controlled by, that other person; or when it and the other
person are both controlled by the same person;

measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form
of a law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative
action, or any other form;

measures by a Party means measures taken by:

(i) central, regional or local governments and authorities;
and

(ii) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers
delegated by central, regional or local governments or
authorities;

In fulfilling its obligations and commitments under this Chapter,
each Party shall take such reasonable measures as may be
available to it to ensure their observance by regional and local
governments and authorities and non-governmental bodies
within its territory;

92

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

natural person of a Party’ means:

(i) | For the UAE, a national or a permanent resident’? of the
UAE;

(ii) For Indonesia, a natural person who is Indonesian
national as defined in the Indonesia Law No. 12/2006;

services include any service in any sector except services
supplied in the exercise of governmental authority;

service supplied in the exercise of governmental
authority means any service which is supplied neither on a
commercial basis, nor in competition with one or more service
suppliers;

service supplier of a Party means any natural or juridical
person of a Party that supplies a service;'*

supply of a service includes the production, distribution,
marketing, sale and delivery of a service.

Article 8.2: Scope

1. The Parties reaffirm their respective commitments under the WTO
General Agreement on Trade in Services (“GATS”) and hereby lay
down the arrangements for the progressive liberalisation of trade in
services between them in conformity with Article V of the GATS.

"1 Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under this Agreement on matters
in relation to permanent resident of a Party.

12 For the purposes of the UAE, the term “permanent resident” refers to any natural person
who is in possession of a valid residency permit under the laws and regulations of the UAE.

13 Where the service is not supplied directly by a juridical person but through other forms
of commercial presence such as a branch or a representative office, the service supplier
(i.e. the juridical person) shall, nonetheless, through such presence be accorded the
treatment provided for service suppliers under the Agreement. Such treatment shall be
extended to the presence through which the service is supplied and need not be extended
to any other parts of the supplier located outside the territory where the service is supplied.

93

This Chapter shall apply to measures by the Parties affecting trade
in services, which is defined as the supply of a service through the
following modes:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party;

in the territory of a Party to the service consumer of the other
Party;

by a service supplier of a Party, through commercial presence
in the territory of the other Party;

by a service supplier of a Party, through presence of natural
persons in the territory of the other Party.

This Chapter shall not apply to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

laws, regulations, or requirements governing the procurement
by government agencies of services purchased for
governmental purposes and not with a view to commercial
resale or with a view to use in the supply of services for
commercial sale;

services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority;

subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-
supported loans, guarantees, and insurance;

measures affecting natural persons of a Party seeking access
to the employment market of the other Party, or measures
regarding citizenship, residence or employment on a
permanent basis;

measures affecting air traffic rights or measures affecting
services directly related to the exercise of air traffic rights,
except as provided for in paragraph 3 of the GATS Annex on
Air Transport Services. The definitions of paragraph 6 of the
GATS Annex on Air Transport Services are hereby
incorporated into and made part of this Chapter, mutatis
mutandis; and

measures affecting cabotage in maritime transport services.

94

Nothing in this Chapter or its annexes shall prevent a Party from
applying measures to regulate the entry of natural persons into, or
their temporary stay in, its territory, including those measures
necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly
movement of natural persons across, its borders, provided that such
measures are not applied in such a manner as to nullify or impair the
benefits accruing to any Party under the terms of a specific
commitment."4

The provisions of this Chapter shall be read with Annex 8B (Financial
Services) and Annex 8C (Movement of Natural Persons), which are
hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.

Article 8.3: Most-Favoured Nation Treatment

1.

Where a Party schedules commitments in accordance with Article 8.7
(Schedules of Specific Commitments), with respect to the services
sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments, and
subject to any conditions and qualifications set out therein, it shall
accord to services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment
no less favourable than that it accords to like services and service
suppliers of any non-party.

The obligations of paragraph 1 shall not apply to:

(a) treatment granted under other existing or future agreements
concluded by one of the Parties and notified under Article V or
V bis of the GATS; and

(b) treatment granted under measures benefiting from the
coverage of a MFN exemption listed in accordance with Article
I1.2 of the GATS or under measures providing for recognition of
qualifications or licences or prudential measures in accordance
with Article VII of GATS or its Annex on Financial Services.

The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of advantages
accorded to adjacent countries shall be governed by paragraph 3 of

14 The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons of certain country and not for those
of others shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing benefits under a specific
commitment.

95

Article Il of the GATS, which is hereby incorporated into and made
part of this Chapter.

If, after the entry into force of this Agreement, a Party enters into any
agreement on trade in services with a non-Party, it shall give
consideration, upon request by the other Party, to negotiate the
incorporation into this Agreement of treatment no less favourable
than that provided under the agreement with the non-Party. The
Parties shall take into consideration the circumstances under which
a Party enters into any agreement on trade in services with a non-
Party.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1 and 4, each Party reserves the right to
adopt or maintain any measure that accords differential treatment to
services and service suppliers of:

(a) In the case of Indonesia, any other ASEAN member state taken
under any agreement on the liberalisation of trade in goods or
services or investment as part of a wider process of economic
integration between or among ASEAN member states; and

(6) In the case of the UAE, any other member state taken under
the agreement between the member states of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the agreement between the Member
States of the Greater Arab Free Trade Area (GAFTA).

Article 8.4: Market Access

1.

Where a Party schedules commitments in accordance with Article 8.7
(Schedules of Specific Commitments), with respect to market access
through the modes of supply identified in paragraph 2 of Article 8.2
(Scope) and the services sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific
Commitments, it shall accord services and service suppliers of the
other Party treatment no less favourable than that provided for under
the terms, limitations and conditions agreed and specified in its
Schedule of Specific Commitments.

In sectors where market access commitments are undertaken, the

measures which a Party shall not maintain or adopt, either on the
basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory,

96

unless otherwise specified in its Schedule of Specific Commitments,
are defined as:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the
form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service
suppliers or the requirements of an economic needs test;

limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in
the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic
needs test;

limitations on the total number of service operations or on the
total quantity of service output expressed in terms of designated
numerical units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an
economic needs test;

limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a particular service sector or that a service supplier
may employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to,
the supply of a specific service in the form of numerical quotas
or the requirement of an economic needs test;

measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity
or joint venture through which a service supplier may supply a
service; and

limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.

Article 8.5: National Treatment

1.

Where a Party schedules commitments in accordance with Article 8.7
(Schedules of Specific Commitments), with respect to the services
sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments, and
subject to any conditions and qualifications set out therein, it shall
accord to services and service suppliers of the other Party, in respect
of all measures affecting the supply of services, treatment no less
favourable than that it accords to its own like services and service
suppliers.

97

A Party may meet the requirement in paragraph 1 by according to
services and service suppliers of the other Party either formally
identical treatment or formally different treatment to that it accords to
its own like services and service suppliers.

Formally identical or formally different treatment by a Party shall be
considered to be less favourable if it modifies the conditions of
competition in favour of services or service suppliers of that Party
compared to the like service or service suppliers of the other Party.

Article 8.6: Additional Commitments

The Parties may also negotiate commitments with respect to measures
affecting trade in services not subject to scheduling under Articles 8.4
(Market Access) and 8.5 (National Treatment), including those regarding
qualification, standards or licensing matters. Such commitments shall be
inscribed in that Party's Schedule of Specific Commitments in accordance
with Article 8.7 (Schedules of Specific Commitments).

Article 8.7: Schedules of Specific Commitments

1.

Each Party shall set out in a schedule, called its Schedule of Specific
Commitments, the specific commitments it undertakes in accordance
with Articles 8.4 (Market Access), 8.5 (National Treatment), and
Article 8.6 (Additional Commitments).

With respect to sectors where such commitments are undertaken,
each Schedule of Specific Commitments shall specify:

(a) — terms, limitations and conditions on market access;
(b) conditions and qualifications on national treatment;
(c) undertakings relating to additional commitments; and

(d) | where appropriate, the time-frame for implementation of such
commitments.

Measures inconsistent with both Articles 8.4 (Market Access) and 8.5
(National Treatment) shall be inscribed in the column relating to

98

Article 8.4 (Market Access). In this case, the inscription will be
considered to provide a condition or qualification to Article 8.5
(National Treatment) as well.

The Parties’ Schedule of Specific Commitments are set forth in
Annex 8A (Schedules of Specific Commitments).

Article 8.8: Modification of Schedules

1.

A Party may modify or withdraw any commitment in its Schedule
(referred to in this Article as the “modifying Party”), at any time after
three years have elapsed from the date on which that commitment
entered into force, in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
The modifying Party shall notify the other Party of its intent to modify
or withdraw a commitment pursuant to this Article no later than three
months before the intended date of implementation of the
modification or withdrawal.

At the request of the affected Party, the modifying Party shall enter
into negotiations with a view to reaching agreement on any
necessary compensatory adjustment within six months. In such
negotiations and agreement, the affected Party and the modifying
Party shall endeavour to maintain a general level of mutually
advantageous commitments not less favourable to trade than that
provided for in the Schedules of specific commitments prior to such
negotiations. The Joint Committee shall be kept informed of the
outcome of the negotiations.

If agreement is not reached between any affected Party and the
modifying Party before the end of the period provided for
negotiations, the affected Party may refer the matter to the
procedures in Chapter 16 (Dispute Settlement).

If an affected Party does not refer the matter to dispute settlement 60
days from the expiration of the period referred to in paragraph 3 of
this Article, the modifying Party shall be free to implement the
proposed modification or withdrawal.

The modifying Party may not modify or withdraw its commitment until
it has made compensatory adjustments in conformity with the

99

findings of the panel established pursuant to Article 16.8 (Dispute
Settlement).

If the modifying Party implements its proposed modification or
withdrawal and does not comply with the findings of the panel
established pursuant to Article 16.8 (Dispute Settlement), the
affected Party may modify or withdraw substantially equivalent
benefits in conformity with those findings.

Article 8.9: Domestic Regulation

1.

In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Party
shall ensure that all measures of general application affecting trade
in services are administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial
manner.

Each Party shall maintain or institute as soon as practicable judicial,
arbitral or administrative tribunals or procedures which provide, on
request of an affected service supplier, for the prompt review of, and
where justified, appropriate remedies for, administrative decisions
affecting trade in services. Where such procedures are not
independent of the agency entrusted with the administrative decision
concerned, the Party shall ensure that the procedures in fact provide
for an objective and impartial review.

The provisions of paragraph 2 shall not be construed to require a
Party to institute such tribunals or procedures where this would be
inconsistent with its constitutional structure or the nature of its legal
system.

Where authorisation is required for the supply of a service on which
a specific commitment under this Chapter has been made, the
competent authorities of each Party shall:

(a) in the case of an incomplete application, on request of the
applicant, where practicable, identify all the additional
information that is required to complete the application and
provide the opportunity to remedy deficiencies within a
reasonable timeframe;

100

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

on request of the applicant, provide without undue delay
information concerning the status of the application; and

if an application is terminated or denied, to the extent possible,
inform the applicant in writing and without delay the reasons for
such action. The applicant will have the possibility of
resubmitting, at its discretion, a new application.

endeavour to accept application in electronic format under the
equivalent conditions of authenticity as paper submissions in
accordance with domestic laws and regulations; and

where they deem appropriate, accept copies of documents
authenticated in accordance with domestic laws and
regulations, in place of original documents.

In sectors in which a Party has undertaken specific commitments, with
a view to ensuring that measures relating to qualification requirements
and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements do
not constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in services, the Parties
agree that such requirements should be, inter alia:

(a)

(b)

(c)

based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence
and the ability to supply the service;

not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the
service; and

in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves a
restriction on the supply of the service.

In sectors in which a Party has undertaken specific commitments, that
Party shall not apply licensing and qualification requirements and
technical standards that nullify or impair its obligation under this
Agreement in a manner which:

(a)

(b)

does not comply with the criteria outlined in subparagraphs 5(a),
(b) or (c); and

could not reasonably have been expected of that Party at the
time the specific commitments in those sectors were made.

101

In determining whether a Party is in conformity with the obligation
under paragraph 6, account shall be taken of international standards
of relevant international organisations applied by that Party. *®

In sectors where specific commitments regarding professional
services are undertaken, each Party shall provide for adequate
procedures to verify the competence of professionals of the other
Party.

Article 8.10: Mutual Recognition

1.

For the purposes of the fulfilment, in whole or in part, of its standards
or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or certification of service
suppliers, and subject to the requirements of paragraph 3, a Party may
recognise, the education or experience obtained, requirements met,
or licences or certifications granted in the other Party. Such
recognition, which may be achieved through harmonisation or
otherwise, may be based upon an agreement or arrangement between
the Parties or may be accorded autonomously.

A Party that is a party to an agreement or arrangement of the type
referred to in paragraph 1, whether existing or future, shall afford
adequate opportunity for the other Party, on request, to negotiate its
accession to such an agreement or arrangement or to negotiate
comparable ones with it. Where a Party accords recognition
autonomously, it shall afford adequate opportunity for the other Party
to demonstrate that the education, experience, licences or
certifications obtained or requirements met in that other Party's
territory should also be recognised.

A Party shall not accord recognition in a manner which would
constitute a means of discrimination between the countries in the
application of its standards or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or
certification of service suppliers, or a disguised restriction on trade in
services.

Where a Party recognises, autonomously or by agreement or
arrangement, the education or experience obtained, requirements

'S The term “relevant international organisations” refers to international bodies whose
membership is open to the relevant bodies of the Parties to this Agreement.

102

met, or licences or certifications granted in the territory of a non-Party,
nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require the Party to
accord such recognition to the education or experience obtained,
requirements met, or licences or certifications granted in the territory
of the other Party.

The Parties agree to encourage, where possible, the relevant bodies
in their respective territories responsible for issuance and recognition
of professional and vocational qualifications to:

(a) establish dialogues with a view to recognising professional and
vocational qualifications, facilitating licensing or registration
procedures, and working towards the development of mutually
acceptable professional standards and criteria with respect to
professional services in sectors of mutual importance to the
Parties.

(b) take into account other relevant multilateral agreements, to which
both countries are Parties, that relate to professional services in
developing such arrangements on the recognition of professional
qualifications, licensing and registration.

For purposes of transparency, on request of the other Party, a Party
shall endeavour to, where practicable provide information concerning
standards and criteria for the certification and licensing of professional
service suppliers, or otherwise provide information concerning the
appropriate regulatory or other body to consult regarding these
standards and criteria.

Article 8.11: Payments and Transfers

1.

Except under the circumstances envisaged in Article 8.12 (Restrictions
to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments), a Party shall not apply
restrictions on international transfers and payments for current
transactions relating to its specific commitments.

Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the
Parties as members of the International Monetary Fund under the
Articles of Agreement of the Fund, including the use of exchange
actions which are in conformity with the Articles of Agreement,
provided that a Party shall not impose restrictions on any capital

103

transactions inconsistently with its specific commitments regarding
such transactions, except under Article 8.12 (Restrictions to Safeguard
the Balance-of-Payments) or at the request of the International
Monetary Fund.

Article 8.12: Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments

1.

Where any of the Parties to this Agreement is in serious balance of
payments difficulties, or under threat thereof, it may adopt or maintain
restrictive measures with regard to trade in services, on which it has
undertaken specific commitments, including on payments and
transfers related to such commitments.

The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of such restrictions
shall be governed by paragraphs 1 to 3 of Article XII of the GATS. A
Party adopting or maintaining such restrictions shall promptly notify
the Joint Committee thereof.

Article 8.13: Denial of Benefits

A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter:

(a) to the supply of a service, if it establishes that the service is
supplied from or in the territory of a non-Party;

(b) in the case of the supply of a maritime transport service, if it
establishes that the service is supplied:

(i) by a vessel registered under the laws of a non-Party, and

(ii) | by a person which operates and/or uses the vessel in whole
or in part but which is of a non-Party;

(c) to a service supplier that is a juridical person, if it establishes that
it is not a service supplier of the other Party.

104

Article 8.14: Review

1. With the objective of further liberalising trade in services between
them, the Parties agree to jointly review their Schedules of Specific
Commitments within the framework of the Joint Committee taking into
account any services liberalisation developments as a result of on-
going work under the auspices of the WTO.

2. — The first such review shall take place no later than five years after the
entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 8.15: Committee on Trade in Services

For the purposes of effective implementation and operation of this Chapter,
the functions of the Committee on Trade in Services (hereinafter referred to
in this Article as “the Committee”) established in accordance with Article
18.3 (Committees and Subsidiary Bodies) shall be:

(d)

reviewing and monitoring the implementation and operation of
this Chapter;

discussing any issues related to this Chapter;

reporting the findings of the Committee to the Joint Committee;
and

carrying out other functions as may be delegated by the Joint
Committee in accordance with Article 18.1 (Joint Committee).

Article 8.16: Cooperation

The Parties shall endeavour to strengthen cooperation efforts in services
sectors, including sectors which are not covered by existing cooperation
arrangements, such as professional services. The Parties shall discuss and
mutually agree on the sectors for cooperation and develop cooperation
programs in these sectors in order to improve their domestic capacities,
efficiencies and competitiveness.

105

CHAPTER 9

DIGITAL TRADE

Article 9.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

digital product means a computer programme, text, video,
image, sound recording or other product that is digitally encoded,
produced for commercial sale or distribution, and that can be
transmitted electronically;'!92%1

electronic authentication means the process of verifying or
testing an electronic statement or claim, in order to establish a
level of confidence in the statement’s or claim’s reliability;

electronic signature means data in electronic form that is in,
affixed to, or logically associated with, an electronic document,
and that may be used to identify the signatory in relation to the
electronic document and indicate the signatory’s approval of the
information contained in the electronic document;

electronic transmission or transmitted electronically means
a transmission made using any electromagnetic means, not
including content of the transmission;

personal data means any information, including data, about an
identified or identifiable natural person, either separately or
combined with other information, either directly or indirectly;

18 For greater certainty, digital product does not include a digitised representation of a
financial instrument, including money.

20 The definition of digital product should not be understood to reflect a Party’s view on
whether trade in digital products through electronic transmission should be categorised as
trade in services or trade in goods.

21 The Parties reserve the right to define whether a product is categorised as a trade in
goods or trade in services.

118

(f) measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of
a law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action,
or any other form; and

(g) unsolicited commercial electronic message means an
electronic message which is sent for commercial or marketing
purposes to an electronic address, without the consent of the
recipient or despite the explicit rejection of the recipient, through
an Internet access service supplier or, to the extent provided for
under the laws and regulations of each Party, other
telecommunications service. A Party may apply the definition to
unsolicited electronic messages delivered through one or more
modes of delivery, including short message services (SMS) or
email.

Article 9.2: Objectives

1.

The Parties recognise the economic growth and opportunity that digital
trade provides, the importance of avoiding barriers to its use and
development, the importance of frameworks that promote consumer
confidence in digital trade, the importance of facilitating the
development and use of electronic commerce, and the applicability of
the WTO Agreement to measures affecting digital trade.

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) promote digital trade between the Parties and the wider use of
digital trade globally;

(b) contribute to creating an environment of trust and confidence in
the use of digital trade; and

(c) enhance cooperation between the Parties regarding the
development of digital trade.

Article 9.3: Scope

1.

2.

This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a
Party that affect trade by electronic means.

This Chapter shall not apply to:

119

(a) government procurement;

(6) information held or processed by or on behalf of a Party, or
measures related to such information, including measures
related to its collection.

For greater certainty, the Parties affirm that measures affecting the
supply of a service delivered or performed electronically are subject
to the relevant provisions of Chapter 8 (Trade in Services) and its
Annexes, including any exceptions or limitations set out in this
Agreement that are applicable to such provisions.

For greater certainty, the obligations contained in Article 9.12 (Cross-
Border Flow of Information) shall not apply to aspects of a Party's
measures that do not conform with the obligation in Chapter 8 (Trade
in Services) to the extent that such measures are adopted or
maintained in accordance with:

(a) any terms, limitations, qualifications, and conditions specified in
a Party’ s commitments, or are with respect to a sector that is not
subject to a Party’ s commitments, made in accordance with
Article 8.3 (Most-Favoured Nation Treatment) or Article 8.7
(Schedules of Specific Commitments); and

(b) any exception that is applicable to the obligations in Chapter 8
(Trade in Services) to be read in conjunction with any other
relevant provisions in this Agreement.

Article 9.4: Customs Duties

1.

Each Party shall maintain its current practice of not imposing customs
duties on electronic transmissions between the Parties, not including
content transmitted electronically.

The Parties may adjust their practice referred to paragraph 1 in light of
any further WTO Ministerial Decisions or Agreements in relation to the
Work Programme on Electronic Commerce.

For greater certainty, paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not preclude any Party
to apply customs procedures for public policy purposes, or from

120

imposing internal taxes, fees, or other charges on electronic
transmissions, provided that such taxes, fees, or charges are imposed
in a manner consistent with the relevant WTO agreements.

Article 9.5: Domestic Electronic Transactions Framework

1.

Each Party shall maintain a legal framework governing electronic
transactions consistent with the principles of the UNC/ITRAL Model
Law on Electronic Commerce (1996) or the United Nations Convention
on the Use of Electronic Communications in International Contracts
done at New York on 23 November 2005.

Each Party shall endeavour to:

(a) avoid any unnecessary regulatory burden on_ electronic
transactions; and

(ob) facilitate input by interested persons in the development of its
legal framework for electronic transactions.

Article 9.6: Electronic Authentication and Electronic Signatures

1.

Except in circumstances otherwise provided for under its laws and
regulations, neither Party shall deny the legal validity of a signature
solely on the basis that the signature is in electronic form.

Taking into account international norms for electronic authentication,
each Party shall:

a) permit participants in electronic transactions to determine
appropriate electronic authentication technologies and
implementation models for their electronic transactions;

b) not limit the recognition of electronic authentication technologies
and implementation models for electronic transactions; and

Cc) permit participants in electronic transactions the opportunity to

prove that their electronic transactions comply with its laws and
regulations with respect to electronic authentication.

121

Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require that, for a particular
category of transactions, the method of authentication meets certain
performance standards or is certified by an authority accredited in
accordance with its laws and regulations.

The Parties shall encourage the use of interoperable electronic
authentication.

Article 9.7: Paperless Trading

1.

Each Party shall endeavour to:

(a) make trade administration documents available to the public in
electronic form; and

(b) accept trade administration documents submitted electronically
as the legal equivalent of the paper version of those documents.

Each Party shall work towards implementing initiatives which provide
for the use of paperless trading, taking into account the methods
agreed by international organisations including the World Customs
Organisation.

The Parties shall cooperate in international fora to enhance
acceptance of electronic versions of trade administration documents.

Article 9.8: Online Consumer Protection

1.

The Parties recognise the importance of adopting and maintaining
transparent and effective measures to protect consumers from
misleading, deceptive, and fraudulent commercial practices when they
engage in digital trade.

Each Party shall adopt or maintain consumer protection laws and
regulations to provide protection against misleading, deceptive, and
fraudulent commercial activities that cause harm or potential harm to
consumers engaged in digital trade.

The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation between their
respective national consumer protection agencies or other relevant

122

bodies on activities related to cross-border digital trade in order to

enhance consumer protection.

Each Party shall publish information on the consumer protection it
provides to users of electronic commerce, including how:
(a) consumers can pursue remedies; and

(b) business can comply with any legal requirements.

Article 9.9: Personal Data Protection

1.

The Parties recognise the economic and social benefits of protecting
the personal data of persons who conduct or engage in electronic
transactions and the contribution that this makes to enhancing
consumer confidence in digital trade.

Each Party shall adopt or maintain a legal framework which ensures
the protection of personal data of the users of digital trade.

In the development of its legal framework for the protection of
personal data, each Party shall take into account international
standards, principles, guidelines, and criteria of relevant international
organisations or bodies.

Each Party shall publish information on the personal information
protection it provides to users of electronic commerce, including how:

(a) individuals can pursue remedies; and

(b) business can comply with any legal requirements.

The Parties shall encourage juridical persons to publish, including on
the internet, their policies and procedures related to the protection of

personal data.

The Parties shall cooperate, to the extent possible, for the protection
of personal data transferred from a Party.

123

Article 9.10: Principles on Access to and Use of the Internet for
Digital Trade

To support the development and growth of digital trade, each Party
recognises that consumers in its territory should be able to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

Access and use services and applications of their choice,
unless prohibited by the Party’s laws and regulations;

Run services and applications of their choice, subject to the
needs of law enforcement; and

Connect their choice of devices to the Internet, provided that
such devices do not harm the network and are not prohibited
by the Party’s laws and regulations.

Article 9.11: Unsolicited Commercial Electronic Messages

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures regarding unsolicited
commercial electronic messages that:

(a)

(b)

(c)

require a supplier of unsolicited commercial electronic
messages to facilitate the ability of a recipient to prevent
ongoing reception of those messages;

require the consent, as specified in the laws and regulations
of each Party, of recipients to receive commercial electronic
messages; or

otherwise provide for the minimisation of unsolicited
commercial electronic messages.

2. Each Party shall provide recourse against a supplier of unsolicited
commercial electronic messages that does not comply with a
measure adopted or maintained in accordance with paragraph 1.

3. The Parties shall cooperate in appropriate cases of mutual concern
regarding the regulation of unsolicited commercial electronic
messages.

124

Article 9.12: Cross-Border Flow of Information

1.

Recognising the importance of the free flow of information in
facilitating trade, and acknowledging the importance of protecting
personal information, the Parties shall endeavour to consider the
possibility of easing barriers to electronic information flows across
borders and of promoting cross-border flow of information, to the
extent consistent with its laws and regulations.

Each party shall adopt or maintain any measures that it considers
necessary for data protection that support the implementation of the
cross-border flow of information and shall keep the implementation
of those measures under review and assess their functioning.

Each Party may consult with the relevant authority of the other Party
regarding the implementation of those measures in supporting the
cross-border flow of information.

Article 9.13: Cooperation

1.

Recognising the importance of digital trade to their collective
economies, the Parties shall endeavour to maintain a dialogue on
regulatory matters relating to digital trade with a view to sharing
information and experiences, as appropriate, including on related
laws, regulations, and their implementation, and best practices with
respect to digital trade, including in relation to:

(a) digital products;

(b) online consumer protection;

(c) personal data;

(d) — unsolicited commercial electronic messages;

(e) — security in electronic communications;

(f) electronic authentication;

(g) _ intellectual property;

125

(h) challenges for small and medium-sized enterprises in digital
trade; and

(i) digital government.

The Parties have a shared vision to promote secure digital trade and
recognise that threats to cybersecurity undermine confidence in the
digital economy. Accordingly, the Parties shall endeavour to
cooperate to:

(a) build the capabilities of their government agencies responsible
for computer security incident response;

(b) use existing collaboration mechanisms to cooperate to identify
and mitigate malicious intrusions or dissemination of
malicious code that affect the electronic net-works of the
Parties; and

(c) develop a workforce in the area of cybersecurity, including
possible initiatives relating to mutual recognition of
qualifications, diversity and equality.

Each Party shall endeavour to cooperate to:

(a) assist small and medium enterprises to overcome obstacles in
the use of digital trade;

(b) identify areas for targeted cooperation between the Parties
which will help the Parties implement or enhance their digital
trade legal framework, such as research and training activities,
capacity building, and the provision of technical assistance;

(c) share information, experiences, and best practices in
addressing challenges related to the development and use of
digital trade;

(d) | encourage business sectors to develop methods or practices
that enhance accountability and consumer confidence to
foster the use of digital trade;

(e) actively participate in regional and multilateral fora to promote
the development of digital trade; and

126

(f) foster an environment conducive to the further advancement
of digital trade, including electronic commerce and the digital
transformation of the global economy, by strengthening their
bilateral relations on these matters.

The Parties shall endeavour to undertake forms of cooperation that

build on and do not duplicate existing cooperation initiatives pursued
in international fora.

127

CHAPTER 10

INVESTMENT

Article 10.1: Relation to the Bilateral Investment Agreement

The Parties reaffirm the Agreement Between the Government of the United
Arab Emirates and the Government of the Republic of Indonesia for the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, done at Bogor,
Indonesia on 24 July 2019 (“UAE-Indonesia Bilateral Investment
Agreement’) and any subsequent amendments thereto.

Article 10.2: Objective

The Parties reaffirm their desire to promote an attractive investment climate

that may contribute to, among others, the expansion of trade in goods and

services under this Agreement.

Article 10.3: Cooperation and Facilitation of Investment

1. The Parties shall cooperate, to the extent possible, to promote and
extend favourable conditions for foreign investment in their territory,
in accordance with their laws and regulations, consistent with Article
5 (Promotion of Investments) of the UAE-Indonesia Bilateral
Investment Agreement.

2. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph 1 may include:
(a) | exchange of information on rules applicable to investment;
(b) identification of investment opportunities and activities to

promote investment abroad, in particular partnerships

involving small and medium-sized enterprises;

(c) | encourage an investment climate conducive to investment
flows; and

(d) _ facilitation, encouragement, and support for investments by
the sovereign wealth funds of both countries.

128

Article 10.4: Committee on Investment

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Investment under the
Joint Committee; which shall comprise representatives of the
Parties.

2. The UAE side will be chaired by Under Secretary of the Ministry of
Finance or the Authorised Representative and the Indonesian side
will be chaired by Deputy Chairman of Ministry — of
Investment/Investment Coordinating Board.

3. The Committee may establish working groups as the Parties deem
necessary.

Article 10.5: Objective of the Committee on Investment
1. The objectives of the Committee on Investment are as follows:

(a) to promote and enhance economic cooperation and
investment projects between the Parties;

(b) to monitor investment relations, to identify opportunities for
expanding investment, and to identify issues relevant to
investment that may be appropriate for negotiation in an
appropriate forum;

(c) to hold consultations on specific investment matters of interest
to the Parties;

(d) to work toward the enhancement of investment flows;

(e) to identify and work toward the removal of impediments to
investment flows; and

(f) to seek the views of the private sector, where appropriate, on
matters related to the work of the Committee.

2. The Committee may coordinate with any other committee in this
Agreement, to address possible cross-cutting issues.

129

For further clarification, the Committee shall not undertake
“Settlements of Investment Disputes between an Investor of a
Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party” as established by
the UAE-Indonesia Bilateral Investment Agreement, and, in
particular, the role that the Joint Committee established by that
Agreement plays with respect to Article 17 of that Agreement.

Article 10.6: Meetings of the Committee on Investment

1.

The Committee on Investment shall meet at such times and venues
as agreed by the Parties, but the Parties shall endeavour to meet no
less than once a year.

A Party may refer a specific investment matter to the Committee on
Investment by delivering a written request to the other Party that
includes a description of the matter concerned.

The Committee on Investment shall take up the matter promptly after
the request is delivered unless the requesting Party agrees to
postpone discussion of the matter.

Each Party shall endeavour to provide for an opportunity for the

Committee on Investment to discuss a matter before taking actions
that could affect adversely the investment interests of the other Party.

130

CHAPTER 11

GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT

Article 11.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(f)

(9)

construction service means a service that has as its
objective the realisation by whatever means of civil or building
works, based on Division 51 of the United Nations Provisional
Central Product Classification (CPC);

government procurement means the process by which
Ministries/Institutions obtain the use of or acquire goods or
services, or any combination thereof, for governmental
purposes and not with a view to commercial sale or resale or
use in the production or supply of goods or services for
commercial sale or resale, financed by the state budget or as
provided in the respective Party’s laws and regulations
governing such process;

in writing or written means any worded or numbered
expression that can be read, reproduced and may be later
communicated, and may include electronically transmitted
and stored information;

limited tendering means a procurement method whereby the
procuring entity contacts a supplier or suppliers of its choice;

multi-use list means a list of suppliers that a procuring entity
has determined satisfy the conditions for participation in that
list, and that the procuring entity intends to use more than
once;

notice of intended procurement means a notice published
by a procuring entity inviting interested suppliers to submit a
request for participation, a tender, or both;

open tendering means a procurement method whereby all
interested suppliers may submit a tender;

131

(h) procuring entity means an entity undertaking government
procurement pursuant to each Party’s laws and regulations
governing government procurement, where expressly open to
international competition;

(i) qualified supplier means a supplier that a procuring entity
recognise as having satisfied the conditions for participation;

(j) selective tendering means a procurement method whereby
the procuring entity invites only qualified suppliers to submit a
tender;

(k) services include construction services, unless otherwise
specified;

(I) supplier means a person or a group of persons that provides
or could provide a good or service to a procuring entity; and

(m) technical specification means a tendering requirement that:
(i) sets out the characteristics of:

(A) goods to be procured, including quality,
performance, safety, and dimensions, or the
processes and methods for their production, or

(B) services to be procured, or the processes or
methods for their provision, including any
applicable administrative provisions; or

(C) addresses terminology, symbols, packaging,
marking, or labelling requirements, as they apply
to a good or service.

Article 11.2: Objective
The Parties recognise the importance of promoting the transparency of

laws, regulations, and procedures, and developing cooperation between the
Parties, regarding government procurement.

132

Article 11.3: Scope

Application of Chapter

1. This Chapter applies to any measure regarding covered
procurement.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, covered procurement means
government procurement where expressly open to international
competition.

Activities Not Covered
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, this Chapter does not apply to:

(a) the acquisition or rental of land, existing buildings or other
immovable property or the rights thereon;

(b) | non-contractual agreements or any form of assistance that a
Party, including its procuring entities, provides, including
cooperative agreements, grants, loans, equity infusions,
guarantees, subsidies, fiscal incentives and sponsorship
arrangements;

(c) the procurement or acquisition of: fiscal agency or depository
services; liquidation and management services for regulated
financial institutions; or services related to the sale,
redemption and distribution of public debt, including loans and
government bonds, notes and other securities;

(d) public employment contracts;
(e) procurement:

(i) conducted for the specific purpose of providing
international assistance, including development aid;

(ii) funded by an international organisation or foreign or
international grants, loans or other assistance to which
procurement procedures or conditions of the
international organisation or donor apply; or

133

(iii) conducted under the particular procedure or condition of
an international agreement relating to the stationing of
troops or relating to the joint implementation by the
signatory countries of a project.

Article 11.4: Exceptions

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from
taking any action or from not disclosing any information that it
considers necessary for the protection of its essential security
interests relating to the procurement:

(a) of arms, ammunition or war material;
(b) — that is indispensable for national security; or
(c) for national defence purposes.

2. Subject to the requirement that the measure is not applied in a
manner that would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable
discrimination between the Parties where the same conditions
prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade between the
Parties, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party,
including its procuring entities, from adopting or maintaining a
measure:

(a) necessary to protect public morals, order or safety;
(b) | necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

(c) necessary to protect intellectual property; or

(d) — relating to the good or service of a person with disabilities, of
philanthropic institutions, or of prison labour.

Article 11.5: General Principles

1. The Parties recognise the role of government procurement in
furthering the bilateral trade relation and in promoting growth and

134

employment. Where government procurement is expressly open to
international competition, each Party, to the extent possible and as
appropriate, shall conduct its government procurement in
accordance with generally accepted government procurement
principles as applied by that Party.

Further Negotiation

2.

In the event that, after the entry into force of this Agreement, a Party
offers a non-Party any advantages of access to its government
procurement market, upon request of the other Party, the former
Party shall, afford the latter Party adequate opportunity to enter into
negotiations.

Procurement Methods

3.

A procuring entity shall use an open tendering procedure for covered
procurement unless Article 10.9 (Qualification of Suppliers) or Article
10.10 (Limited Tendering) applies.

Use of Electronic Means

4.

The Parties shall endeavour to use electronic means in conducting
covered procurement for the publication of procurement information,
notices and tender documentation, and for the receipt of tenders.

When conducting covered procurement by electronic means, a
procuring entity shall:

(a) | ensure that the procurement is conducted using information
technology systems, and software, including those related to
authentication and encryption of information, that are
generally available and interoperable with other generally
available information technology systems, and software; and

(6) establish and maintain mechanisms that ensure the integrity

of information provided by suppliers, including requests for
participation and tenders.

135

6.

Each Party shall establish single electronic system to facilitate the
procurement process, which shall cover the procurement planning,
the selection of suppliers, and the awarding of the contract.

Article 11.6: Publication of Procurement Information

1 ’

Each Party shall make publicly available:
(a) its laws and regulations on government procurement;
(b) its government procurement procedures; and

(c) any standard contract clauses mandated by its laws or
regulations regarding government procurement.

Each Party shall make available and update the information referred
to in paragraph 1 through electronic means.

Each Party shall respond to any inquiries by the other Party relating
to the information referred to in paragraph 1.

Article 11.7: Notices

1.

Each Party shall publish a notice of intended procurement through a
single point of access in the appropriate paper or electronic means
listed in Annex 11A that is directly accessible and free of charge. The
notices shall remain readily accessible to the public until at least the
expiration of the time period for responding to the notice or the
deadline for submission of the tender.

Notice of Intended Procurement

2.

Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, each notice of intended
procurement shall include the following information, unless that
information is provided in the tender documentation that is made
available free of charge to all interested suppliers at the same time
as the notice of intended procurement:

(a) the name and address of the procuring entity and other
information necessary to contact the procuring entity and

136

obtain all relevant documents relating to the procurement, and
the cost and terms of payment to obtain the relevant
documents, if any;

(6b) a description of the procurement, including, if appropriate, the
nature and quantity of the goods or services to be procured
and a description of any options, or the estimated quantity if
the quantity is not known;

(c) if applicable, the time-frame for delivery of goods or services
or the duration of the contract;

(d) if applicable, the address and any final date for the submission
of requests for participation in the procurement;

(e) the address and the final date for the submission of tenders;

(f) the language or languages in which tenders or requests for
participation may be submitted, if other than an official
language of the Party of the procuring entity;

(g) a list and a brief description of any conditions for participation
of suppliers, that may include any related requirements for
specific documents or certifications that suppliers must
provide; and

(h) if, pursuant to Article 11.9 (Qualification of Suppliers), a
procuring entity intends to select a limited number of qualified
suppliers to be invited to tender, the criteria that will be used
to select them and, if applicable, any limitation on the number
of suppliers that will be permitted to tender.

Notice of Planned Procurement
3. The Parties are encouraged to publish, as early as possible in each
fiscal year, a notice regarding their future procurement plans (notice

of planned procurement) which should include the subject matter of
the procurement and the planned time of selection of suppliers.

Article 11.8: Conditions for Participation

137

A procuring entity shall limit any conditions for participation in a
covered procurement to those conditions that ensure that a supplier
has the legal and financial capacities and the commercial and
technical abilities to fulfil the requirements of that procurement.

In establishing the conditions for participation, a procuring entity:

(a)

shall not impose the condition that, in order for a supplier to
participate in a procurement, the supplier has previously been
awarded one or more contracts by a procuring entity of a given
Party or that the supplier has prior work experience in the
territory of that Party; and

may require relevant prior experience if essential to meet the
requirements of the procurement.

Article 11.9 Qualification of Suppliers Registration Systems and
Qualification Procedures

1.

A Party, including its procuring entities, may maintain a supplier
registration system under which interested suppliers are required to
register and provide certain information and documentation.

Selective Tendering

2.

If a procuring entity intends to use selective tendering, the procuring
entity shall:

(a)

(b)

publish a notice of intended procurement that invites qualified
suppliers to submit a request for participation in a covered
procurement; and

include in the notice of intended procurement the information
specified in subparagraph 2(a), 2(b), 2(d), 2(g), and 2(h) of
Article 11.7 (Notices).

The procuring entity shall:

(a)

publish the notice sufficiently in advance of the procurement
to allow interested suppliers to request participation in the
procurement;

138

4.

(c)

provide, by the commencement of the time period for
tendering, at least the information in subparagraph 2(c), 2(e),
and 2(f) of Article 11.7 (Notices) to the qualified suppliers that
it notifies as specified in Article 11.14 (Time Periods); and

allow all qualified suppliers to submit a tender, unless the
procuring entity stated in the notice of intended procurement
a limitation on the number of suppliers that will be permitted
to tender and the criteria or justification for selecting the
limited number of suppliers.

If the tender documentation is not made publicly available from the
date of publication of the notice referred to in paragraph 2, the
procuring entity shall ensure that the tender documentation is made
available at the same time to all the qualified suppliers selected in
accordance with paragraph 3(c).

Multi-Use Lists

5.

A Party, including its procuring entities, may establish or maintain a
multi-use list provided that it publishes annually, or otherwise makes
continuously available by electronic means, a _ notice inviting
interested suppliers to apply for inclusion on the list. The notice shall
include:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

a description of the goods and services, or categories thereof,
for which the list may be used;

the conditions for participation to be satisfied by suppliers for
inclusion on the list and the methods that the procuring entity
or other government agency will use to verify a supplier’s
satisfaction of those conditions;

the name and address of the procuring entity or other
government agency and other information necessary to
contact the procuring entity and to obtain all relevant
documents relating to the list;

the period of validity of the list and the means for its renewal
or termination or, if the period of validity is not provided, an

139

indication of the method by which notice will be given of the
termination of use of the list; and

(e) the deadline for submission of applications for inclusion on the
list, if applicable.

A Party, including its procuring entities, that establishes or maintains
a multi-use list, shall include on the list, within a reasonable period of
time, all suppliers that satisfy the conditions for participation set out
in the notice referred to in paragraph 5.

If a supplier that is not included on a multi-use list submits a request
for participation in a procurement based on the multi-use list and
submits all required documents, within the time period provided for in
Article 11.14 (Time Periods), a procuring entity shall examine the
request. The procuring entity shall not exclude the supplier from
consideration in respect of the procurement unless the procuring
entity is not able to complete the examination of the request within
the time period allowed for the submission of tenders.

Article 11.10: Limited Tendering

1.

If a procuring entity uses limited tendering, it may choose, according
to the nature of the procurement, not to apply Article 11.7 (Notices),
Article 11.8 (Conditions for Participation), Article 11.9 (Qualification of
Suppliers), Article 11.11 (Negotiations), Article 11.12 (Technical
Specifications), Article 11.13 (Tender Documentation), Article 11.14
(Time Periods), or Article 11.15 (Treatment of Tenders and Awarding
of Contracts). A procuring entity may use limited tendering only
under the following circumstances:

(a) if, in response to a prior notice, invitation to participate, or
invitation to tender:

(i) no tenders were submitted or no suppliers requested
participation;

(ii) no tenders were submitted that conform to the
essential requirements in the tender documentation;

(iii) | no suppliers satisfied the conditions for participation; or

140

(b)

(c)

(e)

(iv) | the tenders submitted were collusive,

provided that the procuring entity does not substantially
modify the essential requirements set out in the notices or
tender documentation;

if the good or service can be supplied only by a particular
supplier and no reasonable alternative or substitute good or
service exists for any of the following reasons:

(i) the requirement is for a work of art;

(ii) the protection of patents, copyrights, or other exclusive
rights; or

(iii) | due to an absence of competition for technical reasons;

for additional deliveries by the original supplier or its
authorised agent, of good or service that were not included in
the initial procurement if a change of supplier for such
additional good or service:

(i) cannot be made for technical reasons such as
requirements of interchangeability or interoperability
with existing equipment, software, services, or
installations procured under the initial procurement, or
due to conditions under original supplier warranties;
and

(ii) would cause significant inconvenience or substantial
duplication of costs for the procuring entity;

for a good purchased on a commodity market or exchange;

if a procuring entity procures a prototype or a first good or
service that is intended for limited trial or that is developed at
its request in the course of, and for, a particular contract for
research, experiment, study, or original development. Original
development of a prototype or a first good or service may
include limited production or supply in order to incorporate the
results of field testing and to demonstrate that the prototype
or the first good or service is suitable for production or supply

141

(f)

(9)

(k)

in quantity to acceptable quality standards, but does not
include quantity production or supply to establish commercial
viability or to recover research and development costs.
Subsequent procurements of these newly developed good or
service, however, shall be subject to this Chapter;

if additional service that were not included in the initial contract
but that were within the objectives of the original tender
documentation have, due to unforeseeable circumstances,
become necessary to complete the construction services
described therein. However, the total value of contracts
awarded for additional service may not exceed 50 per cent of
the value of the initial contract;

for new services consisting of the repetition of similar services
which conform to a basic project for which an initial contract
was awarded and for which the entity has indicated in the
notice of intended procurement concerning the initial service
that limited tendering procedures might be used in awarding
contracts for such new services;

for purchases made under exceptionally advantageous
conditions that only arise in the very short term, such as from
unusual disposals, liquidation, bankruptcy, or receivership, but
not for routine purchases from regular suppliers;

if a contract is awarded to the winner of a design contest,
provided that:

(i) the contest has been organised in a manner that is
consistent with this Chapter; and

(ii) the contest is judged by an independent jury with a
view to award a design contract to the winner;

in so far as is strictly necessary if, for reasons of extreme
urgency brought about by events unforeseeable by the
procuring entity, the good or service could not be obtained in
time by means of open or selective tendering; or

any other circumstances as provided in the respective Party’s
laws and regulations.

142

For each contract awarded in accordance with paragraph 2, a
procuring entity shall prepare a report in writing, or maintain a record,
that includes the name of the procuring entity, the value and kind of
good or service procured, and a statement that indicates the
circumstances and conditions described in paragraph 2 that justified
the use of limited tendering.

Article 11.11: Negotiations

1.

A Party may provide for its procuring entities to conduct negotiations
in the context of covered procurement if:

(a)

(d)

the procuring entity has indicated its intent to conduct
negotiations in the notice of intended procurement required
under Article 11.7 (Notices);

it appears from the evaluation that no tender is obviously the
most advantageous in terms of the specific evaluation criteria
set out in the notice of intended procurement or tender
documentation;

there is a need to clarify the terms and conditions; or

all bids exceed the allocated prices provided for in the
procuring entity’s budget.

A procuring entity shall:

(a)

(b)

ensure that any elimination of suppliers participating in
negotiations is carried out in accordance with the evaluation
criteria set out in the notice of intended procurement or tender
documentation; and

when negotiations are concluded, provide a common deadline

for the remaining participating suppliers to submit any new or
revised tenders.

143

Article 11.12: Technical Specifications

1.

A procuring entity shall not prepare, adopt, or apply any technical
specification or prescribe any conformity assessment procedure with
the sole purpose or effect of creating an unnecessary obstacle to
participation of suppliers of the other Party.

In prescribing the technical specifications for the good or service
being procured, a procuring entity shall, if appropriate:

(a) — set out the technical specification in terms of performance and
functional requirements, rather than design or descriptive
characteristics; and

(b) base the technical specification on international standards, if
these exist and are applicable. In the absence of international
standards, it shall base the technical specification on national
technical regulations, recognised national standards, or
building codes.

If design or descriptive characteristics are used in the technical
specification, a procuring entity should indicate, if appropriate, that it
will consider tenders of equivalent good or service that demonstrably
fulfil the requirements of the procurement by including words such as
“or equivalent” in the tender documentation.

A procuring entity shall not prescribe technical specification that
require or refer to a particular trademark or trade name, patent,
copyright, design, type, specific origin, producer, or supplier, unless
there is no other sufficiently precise or intelligible way of describing
the procurement requirements and provided that, in these cases, the
procuring entity includes words such as “or equivalent” in the tender
documentation.

For greater certainty, a procuring entity may conduct market research
in developing specification for a particular procurement.

For greater certainty, this Article is not intended to preclude a
procuring entity from preparing, adopting, or applying technical

144

specification to promote the conservation of natural resources or the
protection of the environment. Such specification, where applicable,
shall be based on relevant and mutually international standards.

For greater certainty, this Chapter is not intended to preclude a Party,
or its procuring entity, from preparing, adopting, or applying technical
specification required to protect sensitive government information,
including specification that may affect or limit the storage, hosting, or
processing of such information outside the territory of the Party.

Article 11.13: Tender Documentation

1.

A procuring entity shall promptly make available or provide on
request to any interested supplier tender documentation that includes
all information necessary to permit the supplier to prepare and submit
a responsive tender. Unless already provided in the notice of
intended procurement, that tender documentation shall include a
complete description of:

(a) — the procurement, including the nature, scope, and, if Known,
the quantity of the good or service to be procured or, if the
quantity is not known, the estimated quantity, and any
requirements to be fulfilled, including any _ technical
specifications, conformity assessment certification, plans,
drawings, or instructional materials;

(b) any conditions for participation of suppliers, including any
financial guarantees, information, and documents that
suppliers are required to submit in connection with the
conditions for participation;

(c) all evaluation criteria to be considered in the awarding of the
contract and, unless price is the sole criterion, the relative
importance of those criteria;

(d) if the procuring entity will conduct the procurement by
electronic means, any authentication and_ encryption
requirements or other requirements related to the submission
of information by electronic means;

145

(e) if there will be a public opening of tenders, the date, time, and
place for the opening, and, if appropriate, the persons
authorised to be present;

(f) any other terms or conditions relevant to the evaluation of
tenders; and

(g) any date for delivery of good or the supply of service.

Subject to any fees if applicable, an entity should make relevant
tender documentation publicly available through electronic means or
a computer-based telecommunications network openly accessible to
all interested suppliers.

In establishing any date for the delivery of good or the supply of
service being procured, a procuring entity shall take into account
factors such as the complexity of the procurement, the extent of
subcontracting anticipated, and the realistic time required for
production, de-stocking, and transport of good from the point of
supply or for supply of service.

A procuring entity shall promptly reply to any reasonable requests for
relevant information by an interested or participating supplier,
provided that such information does not give that supplier an
advantage over other suppliers.

If, prior to the award of a contract, a procuring entity modifies the
evaluation criteria or requirement set out in a notice of intended
procurement or tender documentation provided to a participating
supplier, or amends, or re-issues a notice or tender documentation,
it shall publish or provide those modifications, or the amended or re-
issued notice or tender documentation:

(a) — to all suppliers that are participating in the procurement at the
time of the modification, amendment, or re-issuance, if those
suppliers are known to the procuring entity, and, in all other
cases, in the same manner as the original information was
made available; and

(b) in adequate time to allow those suppliers to modify and re-
submit their initial tender, if appropriate.

146

Article 11.14: Time Periods

General

1.

A procuring entity shall, consistent with its own reasonable needs,
provide sufficient time for a supplier to obtain the tender
documentation and to prepare and submit a request for participation
and a responsive tender, taking into account factors such as:

(a) | the nature and complexity of the procurement;
(b) the extent of subcontracting anticipated; and
(Cc) the time necessary for transmitting tenders by non-electronic

means from foreign as well as domestic points if electronic
means are not used.

Deadlines

2.

The time period for covered procurement shall be in accordance with
each Party’s laws and regulations.

Article 11.15: Treatment of Tenders and Awarding of Contracts
Treatment of Tenders

1.

A procuring entity shall receive, open, and treat all tenders under
procedures that guarantee the fairness and impartiality of the
procurement process and the confidentiality of tenders.

If the tender of a supplier is received after the time specified for
receiving tenders, the procuring entity shall not penalise that supplier
if the delay is due solely to the mishandling on the part of the
procuring entity.

If a procuring entity provides a supplier with an opportunity to correct

unintentional errors of form, the procuring entity shall provide the
same opportunity to all participating suppliers.

147

Awarding of Contracts

4.

To be considered for an award, a tender shall be submitted in writing
and shall, at the time of opening, comply with the essential
requirement set out in the notice and tender documentation and be
submitted by a supplier who satisfies the conditions for participation.

Unless a procuring entity determines that it is not in the public interest
to award a contract, it shall award the contract to the supplier that the
procuring entity has determined to be fully capable of fulfilling the
terms of the contract and that, based solely on the evaluation criteria
specified in the notice and tender documentation, submits:

(a) the most advantageous tender; or
(b) — if price is the sole criterion, the lowest price.

Consistent with the terms of this Chapter, a procuring entity may
require a supplier to comply with general terms and conditions
pursuant to the terms of the contract.

If a procuring entity received a tender with a price that is abnormally
lower than the prices in other tenders submitted, it may verify with
the supplier that it satisfies the conditions for participation and is
capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract.

Article 11.16: Post-Award Information

Information Provided to Suppliers

1.

A procuring entity shall inform participating suppliers that have
submitted a tender of the entity’s contract award decision and shall
do so in writing.

To the extent practicable and consistent with its laws and regulations,
subject to Article 11.17 (Disclosure of Information), a procuring entity
shall, on request, provide an unsuccessful supplier with an
explanation of the reasons why the procuring entity did not select the
unsuccessful supplier's tender or an explanation of the relative
advantages of the successful supplier’s tender.

148

Maintenance of Records

3.

A procuring entity shall maintain the documentation, records and
reports relating to tendering procedures and contract awards for
covered procurement, including the records and reports provided for
in Article 11.10 (Limited Tendering), for at least three years after the
award of a contract.

Article 11.17: Disclosure of Information

Provision of Information to a Party

1.

In the case that the supplier of a Party submitted a tender to a
procuring entity of the other Party, on request of the former Party, the
latter Party shall provide promptly information § sufficient to
demonstrate whether a procurement was conducted fairly, impartially
and in accordance with this Chapter, including, if applicable,
information on the characteristics and relative advantages of the
successful tender, without disclosing confidential information. The
Party that receives the information shall not disclose it to any
suppliers, except after consulting with, and obtaining the agreement
of, the Party that provided the information.

Non-Disclosure of Information

2.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, a Party,
including its procuring entities, shall not, except to the extent required
by law or with the written authorisation of the supplier that provided
the information, disclose information that would prejudice legitimate
commercial interests of a particular supplier or that might prejudice
fair competition between suppliers.

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party,
including its procuring entities, authorities, and review bodies, to
disclose confidential information if that disclosure:

(a) | would impede law enforcement;

(b) = might prejudice fair competition between suppliers;

149

(c) would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of
particular persons, including the protection of intellectual
property; or

(d) — would otherwise be contrary to the public interest.

Article 11.18: Conduct of Procurement

Each Party shall ensure that criminal or administrative measures exist to
address corruption in its government procurement. These measures may
include procedures to render ineligible for participation in the Party’s
procurements, either indefinitely or for a stated period of time, suppliers that
the Party has determined to have engaged in fraudulent or other illegal
actions in relation to government procurement in the Party’s territory. Each
Party shall also ensure that it has in place policies and procedures to
eliminate to the extent possible or manage any potential conflict of interest
on the part of those engaged in or having influence over a procurement.

Article 11.19: Facilitation of Participation by Small and Medium
Enterprises

1. The Parties recognise the important contribution that Small and
Medium Enterprises (SMEs) can make to economic growth and
employment and the importance of facilitating the participation of
SMEs in government procurement.

2. If a Party maintains a measure that provides preferential treatment
for SMEs, the Party shall ensure that the measure, including the
criteria for eligibility, is transparent.

3. To facilitate participation by SMEs in covered procurement, each
Party shall, to the extent possible and if appropriate:

(a) provide comprehensive procurement-related information that
includes a definition of SMEs in a single electronic portal;

(6b) |= endeavour to make all tender documentation available free of
charge;

150

(c) conduct procurement by electronic means or through other
new information and communication technologies; and

(d) consider the size, design, and structure of the procurement,
including the use of subcontracting by SMEs.

Article 11.20: Financial Obligations

1. This Chapter does not entail any financial obligations to the Parties.
2. Each Party is responsible for any financial expenses to fulfil its role
in this Chapter.

Article 11.21: Language
Each Party shall, where possible, endeavour to make the information
referred to in Article 11.6 (Publication of Procurement Information) available

in the English language in its publication of materials or information pursuant
to that Article.

Article 11.22: Review

Notwithstanding Article 19.7 (General Review), the Parties may review this
Chapter within three years of the entry into force of this Agreement, with a
view to making improvements of this Chapter so as to further facilitate
government procurement, as agreed by the Parties.

Article 11.23: Contact Points

1. Exchange of information and cooperation under this Chapter shall
be facilitated through the following contact points:

(a) for the UAE, Ministry of Economy; and

(b) for Indonesia, the National Public Procurement Agency
(NPPA).

151

2. Each Party shall notify the other Party of any changes to its contact
point.

Article 11.24: Cooperation

The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on matters relating to government
procurement, with a view to achieving a better understanding of each
Party's respective government procurement systems and markets and
improve the capacity of procurement stakeholders. Such cooperation may
include:

(a) | exchanging information, to the extent possible, on the Parties’
laws, regulations, and procedures, and any modifications
thereof;

(6b) |= encouraging inclusive and sustainable procurement to help
ensure that the benefits of the Chapter are widely shared;

(c) sharing experience on the use of electronic means in
government procurement systems; and

(d) promoting linkages and business-to-business relations to
increase the understanding and awareness of the Chapter
among the potential suppliers or businesses, especially
SMEs.

Article 11.25: Committee on Government Procurement
1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Government

Procurement under the Joint Committee, which shall comprise

representatives of the Parties.

2. The functions of the Committee shall include:

(a) reviewing and monitoring the implementation and operation of
this Chapter;

152

(b)

(c)

(d)

discussing ways to facilitate Cooperation between relevant
entities of the Parties in the field of government procurement;

reporting the findings of the Committee to the Joint
Committee; and

carrying out other functions as may be delegated by the Joint
Committee in accordance with Article 18.1 (Joint Committee).

153

CHAPTER 12

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

SECTION A: GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 12.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

intellectual property means all categories of intellectual
property that are the subject of Sections 1 through 7 of Part Il
of the TRIPS Agreement;

a national means, in respect of the relevant right, a person of
a Party that would meet the criteria for eligibility for protection
provided for in the TRIPS Agreement.

geographical indication means an_ indication, which
identifies goods as originating in the territory of a Party, or a
region or locality in that territory, where a given quality,
reputation or other characteristic of such goods is essentially
attributable to their geographical origin.

Article 12.2: Objective

The protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights should
contribute to the promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer
and dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and
users of technological knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and
economic welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations.

Article 12.3: Principles

1. Each Party may, in formulating or amending its laws and regulations,
adopt measures necessary to protect public health and nutrition, and
to promote the public interest in sectors of vital importance to its

155

socio-economic and technological development, provided that such
measures are consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.

2. Appropriate measures, provided that they are consistent with the
provisions of this Chapter, may be needed to prevent the abuse of
intellectual property rights by right holders or the resort to practices
which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the
international transfer of technology.

3. Further to paragraph 2, the Parties recognise the need to foster
competition.

Article 12.4: Understandings in Respect of this Chapter

Having regard to the underlying public policy objectives of national systems,
the Parties recognise the need to:

(a) promote innovation and creativity; and

(b) ~ facilitate the diffusion of information, knowledge, technology,
culture, and the arts

through their respective intellectual property systems, while respecting the
principles of transparency and due process, and taking into account the
interests of relevant stakeholders, including right holders, service providers,
users, and the public.

Article 12.5: Nature and Scope of Obligations

Each Party shall give effect to the provisions of this Chapter. Each Party
may, but shall not be obliged to, provide more extensive protection for, or
enforcement of, intellectual property rights under its law than is required by
this Chapter, provided that such protection or enforcement does not
contravene the provisions of this Chapter. Each Party shall be free to
determine the appropriate method of implementing the provisions of this
Chapter within its own legal system and practice.

156

Article 12.6: Understandings Regarding Certain Public Health
Measures

Each Party affirms its rights and obligations under the TRIPS Agreement,
including its commitment to the Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and
Public Health adopted in Doha on 20 November 2001.

Article 12.7: National Treatment

1. In respect of all categories of intellectual property covered by this
Chapter, each Party shall accord to nationals of the other Party
treatment no less favourable than it accords to its own nationals with
regard to the protection? of intellectual property rights.

2. With respect to secondary uses of phonograms by means of analog
communications and free over-the-air broadcasting, however, each
Party may limit the rights of the performers and producers of the other
Party to the rights its persons are accorded within the jurisdiction of
the other Party.

3. Each Party may derogate from paragraph 1 in relation to its judicial
and administrative procedures, including requiring a national of the
other Party to designate an address for service of process in its
territory, or to appoint an agent in its territory, provided that such
derogation is:

(a) | necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations that
are not inconsistent with this Chapter; and

(6b) not applied in a manner that would constitute a disguised
restriction on trade.

22 For the purposes of this paragraph, “protection” shall include matters affecting the
availability, acquisition, scope, maintenance, and enforcement of intellectual property rights
as well as matters affecting the use of intellectual property rights specifically covered by
this Chapter. For greater certainty, “matters affecting the use of intellectual property rights
specifically covered by this Chapter” in respect of works, performances, and phonograms,
include any form of payment, such as licensing fees, royalties, equitable remuneration, or
levies, in respect of uses that fall under the copyright and related rights in this Chapter. The
preceding sentence is without prejudice to a Party’s interpretation of “matters affecting the
use of intellectual property rights” in footnote 3 of the TRIPS Agreement.

157

4, Paragraph 1 does not apply to procedures provided in multilateral
agreements concluded under the auspices of WIPO relating to the
acquisition or maintenance of intellectual property rights.

Article 12.8: Transparency

1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws and regulations of general
application that pertain to the availability, scope, acquisition,
enforcement, and prevention of the abuse of intellectual property
rights are made publicly available in at least the national language of
that Party or in the English language.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to make available the information
referred to in Paragraph 1, which is publicly available, in the English
language and on the internet.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to make available on the internet
databases of any pending and registered trademark rights in its
jurisdiction.

Article 12.9: Application of Chapter to Existing Subject Matter and
Prior Acts

1. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, this Chapter gives rise to
obligations in respect of all subject matter existing at the date of entry
into force of this Agreement for a Party and that is protected on that
date in the territory of a Party where protection is claimed, or that
meets or comes subsequently to meet the criteria for protection
under this Chapter.

2. Unless provided for in this Chapter, a Party shall not be required to
restore protection to subject matter that on the date of entry into force
of this Agreement for that Party has fallen into the public domain in
its territory.

3. This Chapter does not give rise to obligations in respect of acts that

occurred before the date of entry into force of this Agreement for a
Party.

158

Article 12.10: Exhaustion of Intellectual Property Rights
Nothing in this Agreement prevents a Party from determining whether or

under what conditions the exhaustion of intellectual property rights applies
under its legal system.?°

SECTION B: COOPERATION

Article 12.11: Cooperation Activities and Initiatives

The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on the subject matter covered by
this Chapter, such as through training and exchange of information between
the respective intellectual property offices of the Parties, or other
institutions, as determined by each Party. Cooperation may cover areas
such as:

(a) | developments in domestic and international intellectual
property policy;

(b) intellectual property administration and registration systems;
(Cc) education and awareness relating to intellectual property;
(d) — intellectual property issues relevant to:

(i) small and medium-sized enterprises;

(ii) science, technology and innovation activities; and

(iii) | the generation, transfer and dissemination of
technology;

(e) — policies involving the use of intellectual property for research,
innovation and economic growth;

23 For greater certainty, this Article is without prejudice to any provisions addressing the
exhaustion of intellectual property rights in international agreements to which a Party is a
party.

159

(f) implementation of multilateral intellectual property
agreements, such as those concluded or administered under
the auspices of WIPO; and

(g) technical assistance.

Article 12.12: Patent Cooperation and Work Sharing

1. The Parties shall endeavour to, where appropriate, cooperate among
their respective patent offices to facilitate the sharing of search and
examination work, and exchanges of information on quality
assurance systems which may facilitate better understanding in the
Parties’ patent systems.

2. The Parties may cooperate on issues relating to the procedures and
processes of their respective patent offices, with a view to reducing
the complexity and the cost of obtaining the grant of a patent.

Article 12.13: Cooperation on Request

Cooperation activities and initiatives undertaken under this Chapter shall be

subject to the availability of resources, and on request, and on terms and
conditions mutually agreed between the Parties.

160

SECTION C: TRADEMARKS

Article 12.14: Use of Identical or Similar Signs

Each Party shall provide that the owner of a registered trademark has the
exclusive right to prevent third parties that do not have the owner’s consent
from using in the course of trade identical or similar signs for goods or
services that are related to those goods or services in respect of which the
owner's trademark is registered, where such use would result in a likelihood
of confusion. In the case of the use of an identical sign for identical goods
or services, a likelihood of confusion shall be presumed.

Article 12.15: Well-Known Trademarks

1.

No Party shall require as a condition for determining that a trademark
is well-known that the trademark has been registered in the Party or
in another jurisdiction, included on a list of well-known trademarks,
or given prior recognition as a well-known trademark.

Article 6bis of the Paris Convention shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to
goods or services that are not identical or similar to those identified
by a well-known trademark,?* whether registered or not, provided that
use of that trademark in relation to those goods or services would
indicate a connection between those goods or services and the
owner of the trademark, and provided that the interests of the owner
of the trademark are likely to be damaged by such use.

Each Party recognises the importance of the Joint Recommendation
Concerning Provisions on the Protection of Well-Known Marks as
adopted by the Assembly of the Paris Union for the Protection of
Industrial Property and the General Assembly of WIPO at the Thirty-
Fourth Series of Meetings of the Assemblies of the Member States
of WIPO from 20 to 29 September 1999.

Each Party shall provide for appropriate measures to refuse the
application or cancel the registration and prohibit the use of a

24 In determining whether a trademark is well-known in a Party, that Party need not require
that the reputation of the trademark extend beyond the sector of the public that normally
deals with the relevant goods or services.

161

trademark that is identical or similar to a well-known trademark2°, for
identical or similar goods or services, if the use of that trademark is
likely to cause confusion with the prior well-known trademark. A Party
may also provide such measures including in cases in which the
subsequent trademark is likely to deceive.

Article 12.16: Procedures and Classification of Trademarks

1. Each Party shall maintain a trademark classification system that is
consistent with the Nice Agreement Concerning the International
Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the
Registration of Marks done at Nice on 15 June 1957, as amended
from time to time.

2. Each Party shall provide high quality trademark rights through the
conduct of examination as to substance and formalities and through
opposition and cancellation procedures.

Article 12.17 Term of Protection for Trademarks

Each Party shall provide that initial registration and each renewal of
registration of a trademark is for a term of no less than 10 years.

Article 12.18 Exceptions

A Party may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a
trademark, such as fair use of descriptive terms, provided that those

exceptions take account of the legitimate interest of the owner of the
trademark and of third parties.

25 The Parties understand that a well-known trademark is one that was already well-known
before, as determined by a Party, the application for, registration of, or use of the first-
mentioned trademark.

162

SECTION D: COUNTRY NAMES

Article 12.19: Country Names

Each Party shall provide the legal means for interested persons to prevent
commercial use of the country name of a Party in relation to a good in a
manner that misleads consumers as to the origin of that good.

SECTION E: GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS

Article 12.20: Recognition of Geographical Indications

The laws and regulations of each Party shall ensure adequate and effective
means to protect geographical indications. The Parties recognise that
geographical indications may be protected through a trademark or sui
generis system or other legal means.

SECTION F: PATENTS

Article 12.21: Grace Period

Each Party shall disregard at least information contained in public
disclosures used to determine if an invention is novel or has an inventive
step, if the public disclosure of any form:2° 27

26 No Party shall be required to disregard information contained in applications for, or
registrations of, intellectual property rights made available to the public or published by a
patent office, unless erroneously published or unless the application was filed without the
consent of the inventor or their successor in title, by a third person who obtained the
information directly or indirectly from the inventor.

2’ For greater certainty, a Party may limit the application of this Article to disclosures made
by, or obtained directly or indirectly from, the inventor or joint inventor. For greater certainty,
a Party may provide that, for the purposes of this Article, information obtained directly or
indirectly from the patent applicant may be information contained in the public disclosure
that was authorised by, or derived from, the patent applicant.

163

(a) was made by the patent applicant or by a person that obtained
the information directly or indirectly from the patent applicant;
and

(6) | occurred within at least six months prior to the effective date
stated in the law and regulation of each Party.

Article 12.22: Exceptions

A Party may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by
a patent, provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with a
normal exploitation of the patent and do not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the patent owner, taking account of the legitimate
interests of third parties.

Article 12.23: Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge

1.

The Parties reaffirm their sovereign rights over their natural
resources. The Parties also recognise their rights and obligations as
established by the Convention on Biological Diversity, the
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture and other relevant international agreements to which they
are a party with respect to access to genetic resources and
associated traditional knowledge, the fair and equitable sharing of
benefits arising out of the utilisation of these genetic resources, and
associated traditional knowledge, considering the close and
traditional dependence of indigenous and local communities
embodying traditional lifestyles on genetic resources.

The Parties recognise the importance and the value of biological
diversity and traditional Knowledge of indigenous and _ local
communities. Each Party shall determine the access conditions to its
genetic resources in accordance with its international obligations.

The Parties shall take policy, legislative, and administrative
measures in accordance with their international obligations, as
appropriate, for the fulfilment of terms and conditions for access to
genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge.

164

The Parties shall take legislative, administrative, or policy measures
in accordance with their international obligations, as appropriate, with
the aim of sharing in a fair and equitable way the benefits arising from
commercial or other utilisation of genetic resources and associated
traditional Knowledge. Such sharing shall be based upon mutually
agreed terms established at the time of access.

The Parties may, by mutual agreement, review this Article in light of
the results of multilateral negotiations.

SECTION G: COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS

Article 12.24: Rights of Reproduction, Distribution and
Communication

Each Party shall provide?’ to authors, performers, and producers of
phonograms?? the exclusive right to:

(a) authorise or prohibit all reproduction of their works,
performances, or phonograms in any manner or form,
including in electronic form; and

(6) authorise or prohibit the making available to the public of the
original and copies*® of their works, performances and
phonograms through sale or other transfer of ownership.

Each Party shall provide to authors of literary and artistic works the
exclusive right to authorise or prohibit the communication to the
public of their works, by wire or wireless means, including the making
available to the public of their works in such a way that members of

28 For greater certainty, the Parties understand that it is a matter for each Party’s law to
prescribe that works, performances or phonograms in general or any specified categories
of works, performances and phonograms are not protected by copyright or related rights
unless the work, performance or phonogram has been fixed in some material form.

2° References to “authors, performers, and producers of phonograms’” refer also to any of
their successors in interest.

30 The expressions “copies” and “original and copies”, that are subject to the right of
distribution in this Article, refer exclusively to fixed copies that can be put into circulation as
tangible objects.

165

the public may access these works from a place and at a time
individually chosen by them.*'

Article 12.25: Related Rights

1. Each Party shall accord the rights provided for in this Chapter with
respect to performers and producers of phonograms: to the
performers and producers of phonograms that are nationals** of the
other Party; and to performances or phonograms first published or
first fixed?? in the territory of the other Party.*4+ A performance or
phonogram shall be considered first published in the territory of a
Party if it is published in the territory of that Party within 30 days of its
first publication.

2. Each Party shall provide to performers the exclusive right to
authorise or prohibit:

(a) | the broadcasting and communication to the public of their
unfixed performances, unless the performance is already a
broadcast performance; and

(b) — the fixation of their unfixed performances.

3. Each Party shall provide to performers and producers of phonograms
the exclusive right to authorise or prohibit the broadcasting or any
communication to the public of their performances or phonograms,

31 The Parties understand that the mere provision of physical facilities for enabling or
making a communication does not in itself amount to communication within the meaning of
this Chapter or the Berne Convention. The Parties further understand that nothing in this
Article precludes a Party from applying Article 11bis (2) of the Berne Convention.

32 For the purposes of determining criteria for eligibility under this Article, with respect to
performers, a Party may treat “nationals” as those who would meet the criteria for eligibility
under Article 3 of the WIPO Performance and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT).

33 For the purposes of this Article, fixation means the finalisation of the master tape or its
equivalent.

54 For greater certainty, in this paragraph with respect to performances or phonograms first
published or first fixed in the territory of a Party, a Party may apply the criterion of
publication, or alternatively, the criterion of fixation, or both. For greater certainty, consistent
with Article 11.7 (National Treatment), each Party shall accord to performances and
phonograms first published or first fixed in the territory of another Party treatment no less
favourable than it accords to performances or phonograms first published or first fixed in
its own territory.

166

by wire or wireless means,°° 36 and the making available to the public
of those performances or phonograms in such a way that members
of the public may access them from a place and at a time individually
chosen by them.

4. Notwithstanding paragraph 3 and Article 12.26 (Limitations and
Exceptions), the application of the right referred to in paragraph 3 to
analog transmissions and _ non-interactive free over-the-air
broadcasts, and exceptions or limitations to this right for those
activities, is a matter of each Party’s law.°”

Article 12.26: Limitations and Exceptions

With respect to this Section, each Party shall confine limitations or
exceptions to exclusive rights to certain special cases that do not conflict
with a normal exploitation of the work, performance, or phonogram, and do
not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the right holder.

SECTION H: ENFORCEMENT

Article 12.27: General Obligation in Enforcement

Each Party shall ensure that enforcement procedures as specified in this
Section are available under its law so as to permit effective action against
any act of infringement of intellectual property rights covered by this

35 With respect to broadcasting and communication to the public, a Party may satisfy the
obligation by applying Article 15(1) and Article 15(4) of the WPPT and may also apply
Article 15(2) of the WPPT, provided that it is done in a manner consistent with that Party’s
obligations under Article 11.7 (National Treatment).

36 For greater certainty, the obligation under this paragraph does not include broadcasting
or communication to the public, by wire or wireless means, of the sounds or representations
of sounds fixed in a phonogram that are incorporated in a cinematographic or other audio-
visual work.

3’ For the purposes of this paragraph the Parties understand that a Party may provide for
the retransmission of non-interactive, free over-the-air broadcasts, provided that these
retransmissions are lawfully permitted by that Party’s government communications
authority; any entity engaging in these retransmissions complies with the relevant rules,
orders or regulations of that authority; and these retransmissions do not include those
delivered and accessed over the Internet. For greater certainty this footnote does not limit
a Party’s ability to avail itself of this paragraph.

167

Chapter, including expeditious remedies to prevent infringements and
remedies that constitute a deterrent to future infringements. These
procedures shall be applied in such a manner as to avoid the creation of

barriers to legitimate trade and to provide for safeguards against their
abuse.

168

CHAPTER 13

SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED ENTERPRISES

Article 13.1: General Principles

1.

The Parties, recognising the fundamental role of small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs) in maintaining dynamism and enhancing
competitiveness of their respective economies, shall foster close
cooperation between SMEs of the Parties and cooperate in promoting
jobs and growth in SMEs.

The Parties recognise that SMEs, including micro enterprises,
contribute significantly to economic growth, employment, and
innovation, and therefore seek to promote information sharing and
cooperation in increasing the ability of SMEs to utilise and benefit
from the opportunities created by this Agreement.

The Parties acknowledge the provisions of various Chapters in this
Agreement that contribute to encouraging and facilitating the
participation of SMEs in this Agreement.

The Parties recognise the role of the private sector in the SMEs
cooperation to be implemented under this Chapter.

Article 13.2: Cooperation

1.

The Parties shall strengthen their cooperation under this Chapter,
which may include:

(a) | promoting cooperation between the Parties’ small business
support infrastructure, including dedicated SMEs centres,
incubators, and accelerators, export assistance centres, and
other centres as appropriate, to create an_ international
network for sharing best practices, exchanging market
research, and promoting SMEs participation in international
trade, as well as business growth in local markets;

(b) = strengthening their collaboration on activities to promote
SMEs owned by women and youth, as well as start-ups, and

169

promote partnership among these SMEs _ and_ their
participation in international trade;

(c) promoting good regulatory practices and building capacity in
formulating regulations, policies, and programmes that
contribute to SMEs development;

(d) increasing the participation of SMEs in the halal industry;

(e) | exchanging information and best practices in areas including
improving SMEs access to capital and credit, SMEs
participation in covered government procurement
opportunities, and helping SMEs adapt to changing market
conditions;

(f) encouraging the utilisation of —platforms, for business
entrepreneurs and counsellors to share information and best
practices to help SMEs link with international suppliers,
buyers, and other potential business partners in order to
contribute to global value chains;

(g) promoting the use of digital trade by SMEs, with due regard
to the Parties’ laws and regulations;

(h) encouraging innovation and use of technology; and
(i) promoting awareness, understanding, and effective use of the
intellectual property system among SMEs.

Article 13.3: Information Sharing

1. Each Party shall promote the sharing of information related to this
Agreement that is relevant to SMEs, including through the
establishment and maintenance of a publicly accessible information
platform and _ information exchange to share knowledge,

experiences, and best practices between the Parties.

2. The information to be made publicly accessible in accordance with
paragraph 1 will include:

(a) the full text of this Agreement;

170

(b) information on trade and investment-related laws and
regulations that the Party considers relevant to SMEs;

(c) a description of the provisions in this Agreement that the Party
considers to be relevant to SMEs; and

(d) additional business-related information that the Party
considers useful for SMEs interested in benefitting from the
opportunities provided by this Agreement.

Each Party shall take reasonable steps to ensure that information
referred to in paragraph 2 is accurate and up-to-date.

Article 13.4: Committee on Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises

1.

The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Small and Medium-
Sized Enterprises under the Joint Committee, which shall comprise
representatives of the Parties.

A Committee composed of representatives designated by the Parties
will be established to formulate, implement, coordinate, and monitor
the collaborative activities determined under this Chapter.

The members of the Committee shall consist of representatives from
the government departments of each Party responsible for SMEs
development and, when necessary, SME representatives.

The function of Committee is to develop and discuss the possible
areas of cooperation agreed upon by the Parties, coordinate and
monitor the implementation of action plans for the agreed
cooperation based on this Chapter, and consider issues of mutual
interest arising from the implementation of this Chapter.

The Committee meetings will be held as and when necessary on
mutually agreed dates in the Indonesia and UAE.

The Committee shall report periodically to the respective Ministers in
each Party who are responsible for SMEs development.

171

Article 13.5: Contact Points

Each Party shall, within 30 days of the date of entry into force of this
Agreement for that Party, designate one or more contact points to facilitate
cooperation and information sharing under this Chapter and notify the other
Party of the contact details of that contact point or those contact points.

Each Party shall notify the other Party of any changes to those contact
details.

172

CHAPTER 14

ISLAMIC ECONOMY

Article 14.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) Halal means permissible in accordance with Islamic rules and
principles; and

(b) Islamic economy means economic activities and processes,
including, inter alia, securing, producing, _ trading,
disseminating, and financing of goods and services that are in
accordance with Islamic rules and principles.

Article 14:2: Context, Objective, and Scope

1.

This Agreement recognises that both parties reserve the right to
supervise their respective Islamic economic sectors in accordance
with their respective national interests and governing laws and
regulations, consistent with the rights and obligations of both Parties
under this Agreement.

The Parties agree to promote current and future sectors of the
Islamic economy.

The Parties recognise that all sectors of the Islamic economy are
interdependent and mutually reinforce the growth, promotion, and
development of the industry. Both Parties recognise that promoting
the development of the Islamic economy can be an engine for
sustainable economic growth and economic diversification.

This Chapter is based on the principles of mutual cooperation, and

the Parties’ common values and _ interests, considering the
differences in their level of development as appropriate.

173

The Parties shall endeavour to expand bilateral trade volumes,
knowledge transfer, and investment in the Islamic economy to
achieve desired outcomes and fully tap the market potential of the
Islamic economy.

Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, this Chapter applies to
all aspects of Islamic economy in all its dimensions.

Article 14.3: Islamic Economy Development

1.

The Parties recognise that the various sectors of the Islamic
economy consist of, but are not limited to:

(a) raw materials;

(b) food and beverages;

(c) pharmaceuticals and cosmetics;

(d) modest fashion;

(e) tourism;

(f) media and recreation; and

(g) Islamic finance.

The Parties shall strive to facilitate and promote investment,
financing, trade in, and dissemination of, goods and services that
contribute to the development of the Islamic economy.

The Parties underline the importance of promoting inclusive
economic growth through supporting the contribution of micro, small,
and medium-sized enterprises to the Islamic economy.

The Parties agree that sectors related to the Islamic economy need

to be provided with capacity building programs to support Islamic
economic development.

174

The Parties emphasise the importance of information, innovation,
education, training, empowerment, and digitalisation in multiple
sectors of the Islamic economy at all levels in order to contribute to
Islamic economic development.

The Parties agree to exchange views and conduct mutual
cooperation in this area, including bilaterally, regionally, or
multilaterally, as appropriate.

Article 14.4: Mutual Recognition on Halal Certification

1.

For the purposes of this Agreement, the halal standards shall apply
to all goods and related services whose consumption is determined
through Islamic principles.

The Parties agree to pursue the following, decided by the Committee
specified in Article 14.12 (Committee on Islamic Economy
Cooperation), for the purposes of mutual recognition:

(a) — principles for recognition of the equivalence and acceptance
of conformity assessment results as applicable within the
scope of this Agreement;

(b) a mechanism for providing the halal conformity assessment
in the absence of International Halal Accreditation Forum
(IHAF) recognition;

(c) principles for mutual recognition of halal logos, marks, or
labels;

(d) a process of mutual recognition of halal certificates;

(e) identification of various responsibilities associated with
mutual recognition such as, but not limited to, notification to
the relevant stakeholders about the mutual recognition

agreement and its amendments; and

(f) striving to be active IHAF members and support its
implementation.

175

Each Party has the right to impose any additional control measures
for Halal products entering that Party’s territory such as shipment
inspection, laboratory testing, and market surveillance, or any
national food control programs as an added food safety measure to
ensure Halal integrity of the supply chain, with the objective of
simplifying the processes and without creating unnecessary
obstacles to trade.

Each Party shall give the other Party a reasonable opportunity to
prove that the production process, standardisation, requirements, or
certification obtained and completed in the territory of the other Party
can be recognised based on common criteria and the mutual
recognition process derived from the principles and conditions as
agreed by both Parties.

The Parties agree to negotiate and finalise an Annex on mutual
recognition on halal goods and related services within 12 months
from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

The Parties shall jointly work, when deemed necessary, on the halal
accreditation of conformity assessment bodies in keeping with
internationally accepted principles and rules, within a framework of
international organisations which both Parties are members of.

The Parties shall endeavour to work together, in cooperation with
relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organisations,
towards the establishment and adoption of common international
halal standards and criteria for goods and services.

Article 14.5: Cooperation in Halal Goods and Services

1.

The Parties recognise the importance of developing sectors related
to halal goods and services including, but not limited to, foods and
beverages, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics, modest fashion,
tourism, and media and recreation.

For the purposes of paragraph 1, and in a manner consistent with

Article 14.2 (Context, Objectives, and Scope), the Parties commit to
cooperate to:

176

(c)

(e)

(f)

promote and provide necessary support for economic
cooperation between enterprises relating to halal goods and
services that operate in both Parties’ territories, in accordance
with their respective laws and regulations;

facilitate and promote cross-border investment between both
Parties that contribute to the development of sectors related
to halal goods and services including, but not limited to, halal
funds for the Islamic economy, halal industrial parks or
estates, halal ports, special economic zones for tourism, and
other supporting infrastructure for halal industry;

develop and implement an effective and integrated value
chain of halal goods and services between both Parties’
territories;

establish international halal hubs in regions of each Party in
order to expand economic cooperation on the Islamic
economy with other Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
member countries;

develop and promote the Halal Assurance System on halal
industrial estate for securing domestic needs and reaching
export market potential for both Parties; and

develop guiding principles, technical guidance, or best
practices in order to advance sectors related to halal goods
and services.

Article 14.6: Islamic Finance and Social Finance

The Parties recognise the importance of developing the sector of Islamic
finance and social finance, in which they agree to cooperate to:

(a)

(b)

integrate Islamic finance and Islamic social finance with
sectors related to halal goods and services;

promote and facilitate cross-border investment between the

Parties that contributes to Islamic _ financial sector
development;

177

(c) — facilitating the operation of Islamic financial institutions of one
Party within the other Party’s territory, including by licensing
activities and business process support, in compliance with
each Party’s laws and regulations;

(d) promote the effective utilisation of Islamic social finance,
including but not limited to zakat and wagf management,
productive and impact-based wagf schemes, and cross-
border wagf fund allocation between both Parties that
contribute to Islamic social finance development;

(e) collaborate in harmonising standards in Shariah-compliant
finance with the involvement of relevant stakeholders of both
Parties; and

(f) promote the integration of islamic finance with sustainable

finance.
Article 14.7: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
The Parties recognise the importance of developing micro, small and
medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) operating in sectors of the Islamic
economy, in accordance with promoting inclusive growth, where they agree
to cooperate to:

(a) — provide effective literacy and empowerment programs in order
to strengthen and upscale MSMEs of the Islamic economy;
and

(b) integrate MSMEs in both Parties into the global value chain of
sectors of the Islamic economy.

Article 14.8: Digital Islamic Economy

1. The Parties recognise the importance of the digitalisation of the
Islamic economy;

178

The Parties agree to cooperate to expand all aspects of the digital
Islamic economy between both Parties, including, but not limited to,
data centers of the Islamic economy, integrated information systems
or digitised value chains for halal traceability, digital Islamic economic
ecosystem, incubator facilities, and Shariah-compliant venture
capital for digital startups in the Islamic economy.

Article 14.9: Cooperation in Research, Innovation, and Human
Resources

1.

The Parties agree to strengthen their cooperation on jointly
enhancing their capabilities in human resources and collaborating on
research and innovation in order to achieve a global competitive
edge in sectors of the Islamic economy.

For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Parties agree to cooperate on
initiatives including, but not limited to, formulating competency
standard for human resources in the Islamic economy, developing
halal incubation centers for empowering micro and small enterprises,
and supporting halal research and development (R&D) centers and
universities for producing breakthrough innovation related to sectors
of the Islamic economy.

Article 14.10: Cooperation in International Fora

The Parties agree to strengthen their cooperation on issues of mutual
interest to jointly promote the Islamic economy, including its trade and
investment-related aspects, and the harmonisation of standards in relevant
bilateral, regional, and multilateral fora.

Article 14.11: Transparency and Exchange of Information in the
Islamic Economy

1.

Each Party shall disclose its regulations and procedures for trade in
goods, services, and processes under the Islamic economy. Each
Party shall endeavour to provide and update that information

179

electronically and in the English language. Each Party shall
communicate any additions, amendments, or exclusions.

The Parties shall exchange information on promotion and
dissemination of halal and Islamic certifications or accreditations,
conformity assessments, conformity schemes, permissible
commercial information related to the Islamic economy, and other
related areas of mutual interest to respective government bodies,
government-owned enterprises, and private business entities.

Each Party may request the other Party to provide permissible
information on any matter arising under this Chapter. A Party
receiving a request under this paragraph shall provide that
information within 60 days, and, if possible, by electronic means,
addressed to the contact point identified in Article 14.15 (Contact
Points).

For greater certainty, each Party may request technical discussions
with the other Party regarding technical regulations and equivalency
procedures that may have a significant effect on trade.

The Parties shall discuss the matter raised within 60 days of the date
of the request. If the requesting Party considers that the matter is
urgent, it may request that discussions take place within a shorter
time frame. The Parties shall attempt to obtain satisfactory resolution
of the matter as expeditiously as possible, recognising that the time
required to resolve a matter will depend on a variety of factors, and
that it may not be possible to resolve every matter through technical
discussions.

Article 14.12: Committee on Islamic Economy Cooperation

1.

The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Islamic Economy
Cooperation under the Joint Committee, which shall comprise
representatives of the Parties, to further the trade of goods and
services, as well as investment in Islamic economy.

This Committee is also responsible for issues related to mutual

recognition under Article 14.4 (Mutual Recognition on Halal
Certification).

180

The Committee, at its discretion, may form subcommittees or working
groups either on a long term or temporary basis as needed.

The Committee should meet once a year or at closer intervals as
needed.

Article 14.13: Review

The Committee shall periodically review progress achieved in pursuing the
implementation of the provisions and outcomes of this Chapter and shall
consider relevant international developments to identify areas where further
action could promote these objectives.

Article 14.14: Contact Points

1.

Within 60 days of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, each
Party shall designate a contact point for matters arising under this
Chapter.

Each Party shall promptly notify the other Party of any changes to its
contact point or the details of the relevant officials.

The responsibilities of each contact point shall include:

(a)

communicating with the other Party’s contact points, including
facilitating discussions, requests, and the timely exchange of
information on matters arising under this Chapter;

communicating with and coordinating the involvement of
relevant government agencies, including regulatory
authorities, in its territory on relevant matters pertaining to this
Chapter;

consulting and, if appropriate, coordinating with interested

persons in its territory on relevant matters pertaining to this
Chapter; and

181

(d) carrying out any additional responsibilities specified by the
Committee on Islamic Economy Cooperation.

CHAPTER 15

ECONOMIC COOPERATION

Article 15.1: Objective

1.

The Parties reaffirm the importance of economic cooperation
activities between them and shall promote cooperation under this
Agreement for their mutual benefit, taking into account ongoing
efforts and resources available under other programs between the
Parties, so as to facilitate trade and investment between the Parties
and foster their economic growth.

Economic cooperation under this Agreement shall be built upon a
common understanding between the Parties to support the
implementation of this Agreement, with the objective of maximising
its benefits, supporting pathways to trade and investment facilitation,
and further improving market access and openness to contribute to
the sustainable economic growth and prosperity of the Parties,
through enhancing the Parties’ capacities, especially in the sectors
of the economy affected by it.

The Parties acknowledge the provisions that encourage and facilitate
economic cooperation included in various Chapters of this
Agreement.

Article 15.2: Scope

Economic cooperation under this Chapter shall support the effectiveness
and efficiency of the implementation and utilisation of this Agreement
through activities that relate to trade and investment as set out in the
Implementing Arrangement to be agreed by the Parties and those further
developed in the Work Programme.

Article 15.3: Committee on Economic Cooperation

182

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Economic Cooperation
under the Joint Committee, which shall comprises representatives of
the Parties.

2. The functions of the Committee shall include:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(g)

monitor and assess the implementation of this Chapter;

identify new opportunities and agree on new ideas for
prospective cooperation or capacity building activities;

develop and establish the Work Programme;

coordinate, monitor, and review progress of the Implementing
Arrangement and the Work Programme to assess their overall
effectiveness and contribution to the implementation and
operation of this Chapter;

may modify or suggest modifications to the Work Programme
through periodic evaluations;

cooperate with other Committees or subsidiary bodies
established under this Agreement to perform stocktaking,
monitoring, and benchmarking on any issues related to the
implementation of this Agreement, as well as to provide
feedback and assistance in the implementation and operation
of this Chapter; and

report to and, if deemed necessary, consult with the Joint
Committee particularly in relation to the implementation and
operation of this Chapter.

3. Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communication
between the Parties on all matters relating to the implementation of
this Chapter and shall update the other Party on any changes to the
details of the contact points.

Article 15.4: Relations with Other Chapters

The provisions of this Chapter apply to all provisions on economic

183

cooperation included in other Chapters of this Agreement, unless otherwise
specified.

Article 15.5: Work Programme

1.

The Committee on Economic Cooperation shall establish a Work
Programme on Economic Cooperation Activities (Work Programme)
based on proposals submitted by the Parties for areas of
cooperation, which may include fields and forms of cooperation,
contact points, financial and expert resources, and, if applicable,
timeframes for the fulfilment of economic cooperation and capacity
building. The Work Programme shall also take into consideration the
needs identified by Committees established pursuant to Chapter 18
(Administration of the Agreement).

Each activity in the Work Programme shall:

(a) be guided by the objectives agreed in Article 15.1
(Objectives);

(b) be related to trade or investment and support the
implementation of this Agreement;

(c) involve both Parties;
(d) address the mutual priorities of the Parties; and

(e) take into account existing cooperation activities between the
Parties.

The Work Programme shall include periodic reporting to the Parties,
and shall be subject to periodic review and modification from time to
time by the Committee on Economic Cooperation.

Article 15.6: Cooperation on Competition Policy

The Parties encourage cooperation in the area of competition policy to
prevent anti-competitive practices and their adverse effects on trade.
The Parties may cooperate through consultation and exchange of
information related to the implementation and development of competition

184

policy, subject to their laws and regulations. The Parties may conduct such
cooperation through their competent authorities.

Article 15.7: Resources

1. Resources for economic cooperation under this Chapter shall be
provided in a manner agreed by the Parties and in accordance with
each Party’s laws and regulations.

2. The Parties, on the basis of mutual benefit, and as deemed

appropriate, may consider cooperation with, and contributions from,
external parties to support the implementation of this Chapter.

185

CHAPTER 16

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

SECTION A
OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE

Article 16.1: Objective

The objective of this Chapter is to establish an effective and efficient
mechanism for avoiding and settling disputes between the Parties
concerning the interpretation and application of this Agreement with a view
to reaching, where possible, a mutually agreed solution.

Article 16.2: Cooperation

The Parties shall endeavour to agree on the interpretation and application
of this Agreement, and shall make every attempt through cooperation to
arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of any matter that might affect its
operation.

Article 16.3: Scope of Application

1. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this Chapter shall
apply with respect to the settlement of any disputes between the
Parties concerning the interpretation, implementation, or application
of this Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "covered provisions"),
wherever a Party considers that:

(a) |a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with its obligations
under this Agreement; or

(b) the other Party otherwise failed to carry out its obligations
under this Agreement.

186

The Parties agree that neither Party shall have recourse to dispute
settlement under this Chapter for any matter arising under the
following Chapters of this Agreement:

(a) | Chapter 5 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures);

(b) Chapter 9 (Digital Trade);

(c) Chapter 10 (Investment);

(d) Chapter 11 (Government Procurement);

(e) Chapter 13 (Small and Medium Enterprises);

(f) Chapter 14 (Islamic Economy); and

(g) | Chapter 15 (Economic Cooperation).

Article 16.4: Contact Points

1.

Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate
communications between the Parties with respect to any dispute
initiated under this Chapter.

Any request, notification, written submission or other document made

in accordance with this Chapter shall be delivered to the other Party
through its designated contact point.

187

SECTION B
CONSULTATIONS AND MEDIATION

Article 16.5: Request for Information

Before a request for consultations, good offices or mediation is made
pursuant to Article 16.6 (Consultations) or Article 16.7 (Good Offices,
Conciliation, or Mediation) respectively, a Party may request in writing any
relevant information with respect to a measure at issue. The Party to which
that request is made shall make all efforts to provide the requested
information in a written response to be submitted no later than 20 days after
the date of receipt of the request.

Article 16.6: Consultations

1.

The Parties shall endeavour to resolve any dispute referred to in
Article 16.3 (Scope of Application) by entering into consultations in
good faith with the aim of reaching a mutually agreed solution.

A Party shall seek consultations by means of a written request
delivered to the other Party identifying the reasons for the request,
including the measure at issue, a description of its factual basis, and
the legal basis specifying the covered provisions that it considers
applicable.

The Party to which the request for consultations is made shall reply
to the request promptly, but no later than 10 days after the date of
receipt of the request. Consultations shall be held within 30 days of
the date of receipt of the request. The consultations shall be deemed
to be concluded within 30 days of the date of receipt of the request,
unless the Parties agree otherwise.

Consultations on matters of urgency, including those regarding
perishable or seasonal goods, shall be held within 15 days of the date
of receipt of the request. The consultations shall be deemed to be
concluded within those 15 days unless the Parties agree otherwise.

During consultations, each Party shall provide sufficient information
so as to allow a complete examination of the measure at issue

188

including how that measure is affecting the operation and application
of this Agreement.

6. Consultations, including all information disclosed and positions taken
by the parties during consultations, shall be confidential, and without
prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further proceedings.

7. Consultations may be held in person or by any other means of
communication agreed by the parties. Unless the parties agree
otherwise, consultations, if held in person, shall take place in the
territory of the Party to which the request is made.

8. If the Party to which the request is made does not respond to the
request for consultations within 10 days of the date of the receipt of
the request, or if consultations are not held within the timeframes laid
down in paragraph 3 or in paragraph 4 respectively, or if the Parties
agree not to have consultations, or if consultations have been
concluded and no mutually agreed solution has been reached, the
Party that sought consultations may have recourse to Article 16.8
(Establishment of a Panel).

Article 16.7: Good Offices, Conciliation, or Mediation

1. The Parties may at any time agree to enter into procedures for good
offices, conciliation, or mediation. They may begin at any time and
be terminated by either Party at any time.

2. If the Parties agree, procedures for good offices, conciliation, or
mediation may continue while the panel procedures set out in Section
C (Panel Procedures) proceed.

3. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation, or mediation and the
particular positions taken by the Parties in these proceedings, shall
be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of either Party in
any further proceedings under this Chapter or any other proceedings
before a forum selected by the Parties.

189

SECTION C
PANEL PROCEDURES

Article 16.8: Establishment of a Panel

1. If the Parties fail to resolve the dispute through recourse to
consultations as provided for in Article 16.6 (Consultations), the Party
that sought consultations may request the establishment of a panel.

2. The request for the establishment of a panel shall be made by means
of a written request delivered to the other Party and shall identify the
measure at issue and indicate the legal basis, specifying the relevant
covered provisions in a manner sufficient to present how such
measure is inconsistent with those provisions.

3. When a request is made by the complaining party in accordance with
paragraph 1, a panel shall be established.

Article 16.9: Composition of a Panel

1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, a panel shall consist of three
panelists.
2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the panelists shall not be

nationals of the Parties to the dispute.

3. Within 20 days of the establishment of a panel, each Party shall
appoint a panelist. The Parties shall, by common agreement, appoint
the third panelist, who shall serve as the chairperson of the panel,
within 40 days of the establishment of a panel.

4. If either Party fails to appoint a panelist within the time period
established in paragraph 3, the other Party may request that the
Director-General of the World Trade of Organisation designate a
panelist within 20 days of that request.

190

5. If the Parties do not agree on the chairperson of the panel within the
time period established in paragraph 3, they shall within the next 10
days, exchange their respective lists comprising three nominees,
none of whom shall be nationals of either Party. The chair shall then
be appointed by draw of lot from the lists within 10 days of the expiry
of the time period during which the Parties shall exchange their
respective lists of nominees. The selection by lot of the chairperson
of the panel shall be made by the Joint Committee.

6. If a Party fails to submit its list of three nominees within the time
period established in paragraph 4, the chairperson shall be appointed
by draw of lot from the list submitted by the other Party.

7. The date of composition of the panel shall be the date on which the

last of the three selected panelists has notified the Parties of the
acceptance of his or her appointment.

Article 16.10: Requirements for Panelists

1. Each panelist shall:

(a) have demonstrated expertise in law, international trade, and
other matters covered by this Agreement;

(b) be independent of, and not be affiliated with or take
instructions from, either Party;

(c) serve in his or her individual capacity and shall not take
instructions from any organisation or government with regard

to matters related to the dispute;

(d) | comply with the Code of Conduct for Panelists established in
Annex 16B;

(e) be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity, reliability, and
sound judgment; and

191

(f) disclose to the Parties information which may give rise to
justifiable doubts as to his or her independence or impartiality.

2. The chairperson shall also have experience in dispute settlement
procedures.
3. Persons who provided good offices or mediation to the Parties,

pursuant to Article 16.7 (Good Offices, Conciliation, or Mediation) in
relation to the same or a substantially equivalent matter, shall not be
eligible to be appointed as panelists in that matter.

Article 16.11: Replacement of Panelists

If any of the panelists of the original panel becomes unable to act,
withdraws, or needs to be replaced because that panelist does not comply
with the requirements of the Code of Conduct, a successor panelist shall be
appointed in the same manner as prescribed for the appointment of the
Original panelist, and the successor shall have the powers and duties of the
Original panelist. The work of the panel shall be suspended during the
appointment of the successor panelist.

Article 16.12: Functions of the Panel

Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the panel:

(a) — shall make an objective assessment of the matter before it,
including an objective assessment of the facts of the case and
the applicability and conformity of the measure at issue with
the covered provisions;

(b) — shall set out, in its decisions and reports, the findings of fact

and law and the rationale behind any findings and conclusions
that it makes; and

192

(c) should consult regularly with the Parties and provide adequate
opportunities for the development of a mutually agreed
solution.

Article 16.13: Terms of Reference

1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, within 15 days of the date of
establishment of the panel, the terms of reference of the panel shall
be:

“to examine, in the light of the relevant covered provisions of this
Agreement cited by the Parties, the matter referred to in the request
for the establishment of the panel, to make findings on the conformity
of the measure at issue with the relevant covered provisions of this
Agreement as well as recommendations, if any, on the means to
resolve the dispute, and to deliver a report in accordance with Articles
16.18 (Interim Report) and 16.19 (Final Report).”

2. If the Parties agree on other terms of reference than those referred

to in paragraph 1, they shall notify the agreed terms of reference to
the panel no later than 5 days after their agreement.

Article 16.14: Decision on Urgency

1. If a Party so requests, the panel shall decide, within 15 days of its
composition, whether the dispute concerns matters of urgency.

2. In cases of urgency, the applicable time periods set out in Articles
16.18 (Interim Report) and 16.19 (Final Report) shall be half of the
time prescribed therein.

Article 16.15: Rules of Interpretation

193

1. The panel shall interpret the covered provisions in accordance with
customary rules of interpretation of public international law, including
those codified in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties done
at Vienna on 23 May 1969.

2. When appropriate, the panel may also take into account relevant
interpretations in reports of prior panels established under this
Chapter and reports of panels and the Appellate Body adopted by
the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO.

Article 16.16: Rules of Procedure for the Panel

1. Unless the parties agree otherwise, the panel shall follow the model
rules of procedure set out in Annex 16A (Rules of Procedure for the
Panel).

2. The panel may, after consulting with the Parties, adopt additional

rules of procedure not inconsistent with the model rules of procedure.

Article 16.17: Receipt of Information

1. The panel, on request of a Party or on its own initiative, may seek
from the Parties relevant information it considers necessary and
appropriate. The Parties shall respond promptly and fully to any
request by the panel for information.

2. The panel, on request of a Party or on its own initiative, may seek
information or technical advice of experts from any sources it
considers appropriate, provided that the Parties agree and subject to
any terms and conditions agreed by the Parties.

3. Any information obtained by the panel under this Article shall be

made available to the Parties, and the Parties may provide
comments on that information.

194

Article 16.18: Interim Report

1. The panel shall deliver an interim report to the Parties within 120 days
of the date of composition of the panel. When the panel considers
that this deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the panel shall
notify the Parties in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the
date on which the panel plans to deliver its interim report. Under no
circumstances shall the delay exceed 30 days after the deadline.

2. The interim report shall set out a descriptive part and the panel’s
findings and conclusions.

3. Each Party may submit to the panel written comments and a written
request to review precise aspects of the interim report within 15 days
of the date of issuance of the interim report. Each Party may
comment on the other Party's request within 10 days of the delivery
of the request.

4. After considering any written comments and requests by each Party
on the interim report, the panel may modify the interim report and
make any further examination it considers appropriate.

Article 16.19: Final Report

1. The panel shall deliver its final report to the Parties within 150 days
of the date of composition of the panel. When the panel considers
that this deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the panel shall
notify the Parties in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the
date on which the panel plans to deliver its final report. Under no
circumstances shall the delay exceed 30 days after the deadline.

2. The final report shall include a discussion of any written comments
and requests made by the Parties on the interim report. The panel
may, in its final report, suggest ways in which the final report could
be implemented.

195

3. The final report shall be made public within 15 days of its delivery to
the Parties unless the Parties agree to publish the final report only in
parts or not to publish the final report.

Article 16.20: Implementation of the Final Report

1. When the panel finds that the respondent Party has acted
inconsistently with a covered provision, the respondent Party shall
take any measures necessary to comply promptly and in good faith
with the findings and conclusions in the final report.

2. The respondent Party shall, no later than 30 days after delivery of the
final report, notify the complaining Party of the length of the
reasonable period of time necessary for compliance with the final
report, and the Parties shall endeavour to agree on the reasonable
period of time required for compliance with the final report.

Article 16.21: Reasonable Period of Time for Compliance

1. If the Parties have not agreed on the length of the reasonable period
of time, the complaining Party may, no later than 20 days after the
date of receipt of the notification made by the respondent Party in
accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 16.20 (Implementation of the
Final Report), request in writing that the original panel determine the
length of the reasonable period of time. Such request shall be
notified simultaneously to the respondent Party. The 20-day period
referred to in this paragraph may be extended by mutual agreement
of the Parties.

2. The original panel shall deliver its decision to the Parties within 20
days of the date of submission of the request made under paragraph
1.

3. The length of the reasonable period of time for compliance with the
final report may be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.

196

Article 16.22: Compliance Review

1. The respondent Party shall deliver a written notification of its
progress in complying with the final report to the complaining Party
at least 30 days before the expiry of the reasonable period of time
unless the Parties agree otherwise.

2. The respondent Party shall, no later than the date of expiry of the
reasonable period of time, deliver a notification to the complaining
Party of any measures that it has taken to comply with the final report.

3. When the Parties disagree on the existence of measures to comply
with the final report, or their consistency with the covered provisions,
the complaining Party may request in writing that the original panel
decide on the matter. Such request shall be notified simultaneously
to the respondent Party.

4, The request made under paragraph 3 shall provide the factual and
legal basis for the complaint, including an identification of the specific
measures at issue and an indication of why any measures taken by
the respondent fail to comply with the final report or are otherwise
inconsistent with the covered provisions.

5. The panel shall deliver its decision to the Parties within 60 days of

the date of submission of the request.

Article 16.23: Temporary Remedies in Case of Non-Compliance

1. If the respondent Party:

(a) fails to notify any measures taken to comply with the final
report before the expiry of the reasonable period of time;

(b) notifies the complaining party in writing that it is not possible

to comply with the final report within the reasonable period of
time; or

197

(c) — the original panel finds that no measure taken to comply exists
or that the measure taken to comply with the final report as
notified by the party complained against is inconsistent with
the covered provisions;

the respondent Party shall, on request of the complaining Party, enter
into consultations with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory
agreement or any necessary compensation.

If the Parties fail to reach a mutual satisfactory agreement or to agree
on compensation within 20 days of the date of receipt of the request
made in accordance with paragraph 1, the complaining Party may
deliver a written notification to the respondent Party that it intends to
suspend the application to that Party of benefits or other obligations
under this Agreement. The notification shall specify the level of
intended suspension of benefits or other obligations.

The complaining Party may begin the suspension of benefits or other
obligations referred to in the preceding paragraph 20 days after the
date on which it served notice to the respondent Party, unless the
respondent Party made a request under paragraph 7.

The suspension of benefits or other obligations:
(a) — shall be at a level equivalent to the nullification or impairment
that is caused by the failure of the respondent Party to comply

with the final report; and

(b) — shall be restricted to benefits accruing to the respondent Party
under this Agreement.

In considering what benefits to suspend in accordance with
paragraph 2, the complaining Party shall apply the following
principles:

(a) | the complaining Party should first seek to suspend benefits in
the same sector or sectors affected by the measure that the

198

panel has found to be inconsistent with this Agreement or
have caused nullification or impairment;%8

(b) the complaining Party may suspend benefits in other sectors
if it considers that it is not practicable or effective to suspend
benefits or other obligations in the same sector.

6. The suspension of benefits or other obligations shall be temporary
and shall only apply until the inconsistency of the measure with the
relevant covered provisions which has been found in the final report
has been removed, or until the Parties have reached a mutually
satisfactory agreement or any necessary compensation.

7. If the respondent Party considers that the suspension of benefits
does not comply with paragraphs 4 and 5, that Party may request in
writing to the original panel to examine the matter no later than 15
days after the date of receipt of the notification referred to in
paragraph 2. That request shall be notified simultaneously to the
complaining Party. The original panel shall notify to the Parties its
decision on the matter no later than 30 days of the receipt of the
request from the respondent Party. The complaining Party shall not
suspend benefits or other obligations until the original panel has
delivered its decision. The suspension of benefits or other obligations
shall be consistent with this decision.

Article 16.24: Review of any Measures Taken to Comply after the
Adoption of Temporary Remedies

1. Upon the notification by the respondent Party to the complaining
Party of the measure taken to comply with the final report:

(a) in a situation where the right to suspend benefits or other
obligations has been exercised by the complaining Party in
accordance with Article 16.23 (Temporary Remedies in Case

38 For purposes of this paragraph, “sector” means: (i) with respect to goods, all goods; (ii)
with respect to services, a principal sector as identified in the current “Services Sectoral
Classification List” which identifies such sectors.

199

of Non-Compliance), the complaining Party shall terminate the
suspension of benefits or other obligations no later than 30
days after the date of receipt of the notification, with the
exception of the cases referred to in paragraph 2; or

(b) in a situation where necessary compensation has been
agreed, the respondent Party may terminate the provision of
such compensation no later than 30 days after the date of
receipt of the notification, with the exception of the cases
referred to in paragraph 2.

If the Parties do not reach an agreement on whether the measure
notified in accordance with paragraph 1 is consistent with the
relevant covered provisions within 30 days of the date of receipt of
the notification, the complaining Party shall request in writing that the
original panel examine the matter. That request shall be notified
simultaneously to the respondent Party. The decision of the panel
shall be notified to the Parties no later than 45 days of the date of
submission of the request. If the panel decides that the measure
notified in accordance with paragraph 1 is consistent with the
relevant covered provisions, the complaining Party shall terminate
the suspension of benefits or other obligations, or the respondent
Party shall terminate the provision of the compensation, no later than
15 days of the date of the decision. If the panel determines that the
notified measure achieves only partial compliance with the covered
provisions, the level of suspension of benefits or other obligations, or
of the compensation, shall be adapted in light of the decision of the
panel.

Article 16.25: Suspension and Termination of Proceedings

If both Parties so request, the panel shall suspend its work for a period
agreed by the Parties and not exceeding 12 consecutive months. In the
event of a suspension of the work of the panel, the relevant time periods
under this Section shall be extended by the same period of time for which
the work of the panel was suspended. The panel shall resume its work
before the end of the suspension period at the written request of both

200

Parties. If the work of the panel has been suspended for more than 12
consecutive months, the authority of the panel shall lapse and the dispute
settlement procedure shall be terminated.

201

SECTION D
General Provisions

Article 16.26: Choice of Forum

1. Unless otherwise provided in this Article, this Chapter is without
prejudice to the rights of the Parties to have recourse to dispute
settlement procedures available under other international trade
agreements to which they are both Parties.

2. When a dispute arises with regard to the alleged inconsistency of a
particular measure with an obligation under this Agreement and a
substantially equivalent obligation under another international trade
agreement to which both Parties are party, including the WTO
agreements, the complaining Party may select the forum in which to
settle the dispute.

3. Once a Party has selected the forum and initiated dispute settlement
proceedings under this Chapter or under the other international
agreement with respect to the particular measure referred to in
paragraph 2, that Party shall not initiate dispute settlement
proceedings in another forum with respect to that particular measure
unless the forum selected first fails to make findings on the issues in
dispute for jurisdictional or procedural reasons.

4, For the purpose of paragraph 3:

(a) dispute settlement proceedings under this Chapter are
deemed to be initiated when a Party requests the
establishment of a panel in accordance with Article 16.8
(Establishment of a Panel);

(b) dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement
are deemed to be initiated when a Party requests the
establishment of a panel in accordance with Article 6 of the
Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the
Settlement of Disputes in Annex 2 to the WTO Agreement;
and

202

(c) dispute settlement proceedings under any other agreements
are deemed to be initiated when a Party requests the
establishment of a dispute settlement panel in accordance
with the relevant provisions of that agreement.

Article 16.27: Costs

1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the costs of the panel and other
expenses associated with the conduct of its proceedings shall be
borne in equal parts by both Parties.

2. Each Party shall bear its own expenses and legal costs in the panel

proceedings.

Article 16.28: Mutually Agreed Solution

1. The Parties may reach a mutually agreed solution at any time with
respect to any dispute covered by this Chapter.

2. If a mutually agreed solution is reached during the panel procedure,
the Parties shall jointly notify that solution to the chairperson of the
panel. Upon such notification, the panel shall be terminated.

3. Each Party shall take measures necessary to implement the mutually
agreed solution within the agreed time period.

4. No later than the expiry of the agreed time period, the implementing

Party shall inform the other Party, in writing, of any measures that it
has taken to implement the mutually agreed solution.

203

Article 16.29: Time Periods

1. All time periods laid down in this Chapter shall be counted in calendar
days from the day following the act to which they refer.

2. Any time periods referred to in this Chapter may be modified by
mutual agreement of the Parties.

Article 16.30: Annexes

The Joint Committee may modify Annex 16A (Rules of Procedure for the
Panel) and Annex 16B (Code of Conduct for Panelists).

204

CHAPTER 17

GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS

Article 17.1: Administrative Proceedings

With a view to administering its laws, regulations, procedures, and
administrative rulings of general application with respect to any matter
covered by this Agreement in a consistent, impartial, objective, and
reasonable manner, each Party, to the extent practicable and in accordance
with its laws and regulations, shall ensure in its administrative proceedings
applying such measures to a particular person, good, or service of the other
Party in specific cases that:

(a)

wherever possible, a person of the other Party that is directly
affected by such a proceeding is provided with reasonable
notice, in accordance with its domestic procedures, of when a
proceeding is initiated, including a description of the nature of
the proceeding, a statement of the legal authority under which
the proceeding is initiated, and a general description of any
issues in question;

wherever possible, a person of the other Party that is directly
affected by such a proceeding is afforded a reasonable
opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of that
person’s position prior to any final administrative action, when
time, the nature of the proceeding, and the public interest
permit; and it follows its procedures in accordance with its laws
and regulations.

Article 17.2: Review and Appeal

1.

Each Party may establish or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial, or
administrative tribunals or procedures for the purposes of prompt
review and, where warranted, correction of final administrative
actions with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement and in
a manner consistent with its laws and regulations.

214

The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not be construed to require a
Party to institute such tribunals or procedures where this would be
inconsistent with its constitutional structure or the nature of its legal
system.

Article 17.3: Measures Against Corruption

1.

Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations, take
appropriate measures to prevent and combat corruption with respect
to any matter covered by this Agreement.

Neither Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under
Chapter 16 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter arising under this
Article.

Article 17.4: General Exceptions

1.

For the purposes of Chapters 2 (Trade in Goods), 3 (Rules of Origin),
4 (Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation), 5 (Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures), and 6 (Standards, Technical Regulations
and Conformity Assessment Procedures), Article XX of the GATT
1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and form part
of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

For the purposes of Chapter 8 (Trade in Services) and its Annexes
and Chapter 9 (Digital Trade)*9, Article XIV of the GATS, including its
footnotes, is incorporated into and forms part of this Agreement,
mutatis mutandis.

8° This paragraph is without prejudice to whether a Party considers a digital product to be
a good or service.

215

Article 17.5: Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a)

(b)

to require a Party to furnish any information, the disclosure
of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;

or

to prevent a Party from taking any action which it considers
necessary for the protection of its essential security interests:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(v)

relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the
materials from which they are derived;

relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and
implements of war and to such traffic in other goods
and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for
the purpose of supplying a military establishment;

relating to the supply of services as carried out
directly or indirectly for the purpose of provisioning a
military establishment;

relating to the protection of critical public
infrastructure*®, including, but not limited to, critical
communications infrastructures, power
infrastructures and water infrastructures, from
deliberate attempts intended to disable or degrade
such infrastructures;

taken in time of domestic emergency, or war or other
emergency in international relations;

to prevent any Party from taking any actions in pursuance of
its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

40 For clarity, this includes critical public infrastructures whether publicly or privately owned.

216

Article 17.6: Taxation Measures

1.

Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall
apply to taxation measures.

This Agreement shall only grant rights or impose obligations with
respect to taxation measures where corresponding rights and
obligations are also granted or imposed under the WTO Agreement.

Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of
either Party under any tax convention. In the event of any
inconsistency between this Agreement and any such tax convention,
that convention shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. The
competent authorities under that convention shall have the sole
responsibility for jointly determining whether any inconsistency exists
between this Agreement and that convention.

Nothing in this Agreement shall oblige a Party to extend to the other

Party the benefit of any treatment, preference or privilege arising

from any existing or future tax convention by which the Party is

bound.

For the purposes of this Article:

(a) tax convention means a convention for the avoidance of
double taxation or other international taxation agreement or

arrangement to which the Parties are party; and

(b) taxes and taxation measures do not include customs duties.

217

CHAPTER 18

ADMINISTRATION OF THE AGREEMENT

Article 18.1: Joint Committee

The Parties hereby establish a Joint Committee.

The Joint Committee shall meet at the level of Minister unless the
Parties otherwise agree. If the Joint Committee meets at the level of
Ministers, it shall be preceded by a Senior Officials level meeting.

The Joint Committee:

(a) shall be composed of representatives of the UAE and
Indonesia; and

(b) may establish standing or ad hoc sub-committees or working
groups and assign any of its responsibilities thereto.

The Joint Committee shall meet within one year from the entry into
force of this Agreement. Its meetings shall be chaired jointly by the
Parties or as otherwise mutually determined by the Parties.
Thereafter, it shall meet every two years, unless the Parties agree
otherwise, to consider any matter relating to this Agreement. The
regular sessions of the Joint Committee shall be held alternately in
the territories of the Parties.

The Joint Committee may also hold special sessions without undue
delay from the date of a request thereof from either Party.

The functions of the Joint Committee shall be as follows:
(a) to review and assess the results and overall operation of this

Agreement in the light of the experience gained during its
application and its objectives;

218

10.

(b) to consider any amendments to this Agreement that may be
proposed by either Party, including the modification of
concessions made under this Agreement;

(c) to endeavour to amicably resolve disputes between the
Parties arising from the interpretation or application of this
Agreement, or any other agreements relating to market
liberalisation to which they are both parties;

(d) to supervise and coordinate the work of all committees and
subsidiary bodies established under this Agreement;

(e) consider any other matter that may affect the operation of this
Agreement;

(f) adopt decisions or make recommendations as envisaged by
this Agreement; and

(g) to carry out any other functions relating to the areas covered
by this Agreement as may be agreed by the Parties.

The Joint Committee shall adopt its own rules of procedures at its
first meeting.

Meetings of the Joint Committee and of any committees or subsidiary
bodies may be conducted in person or by any other means as
determined by the Parties.

The Joint Committee shall take decisions on any matter within its
functions by mutual agreement. The decisions taken shall be binding
upon the Parties, subject to their respective applicable legal
requirements and procedures.

The Parties may invite, by mutual agreement, representatives of
other relevant entities, including business stakeholders, with
necessary expertise relevant to the issues to be discussed, to attend
meetings of the Joint Committee.

219

Article 18.2: Committees and Subsidiary Bodies

1.

The following Committees are established under this Agreement:

(a)

(b)

(e)

(f)

(9)

(h)

Committee on Trade in Goods, in accordance with Article 2.21
(Committee on Trade in Goods) of Chapter 2 (Trade in
Goods);

Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, in
accordance with Article 5.6 (Committee on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures) of Chapter 5 (Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures);

Committee on STRACAP, in accordance with Article 6.12
(Committee on STRACAP) of Chapter 6 (Standards,
Technical Regulations, and Conformity Assessment
Procedures);

Committee on Trade Remedies, in accordance with Article 7.5
(Committee on Trade Remedies) of Chapter 7 (Chapter
Remedies);

Committee on Trade in Services, in accordance with Article
8.5 (Committee on Trade in Services) of Chapter 8 (Trade in
Services);

Committee on Investment, in accordance with Article 10.4
(Committee on Investment) of Chapter 10 (Investment);

Committee on Government Procurement in accordance with
Article 11.25 (Committee on Government Procurement) of
Chapter 11 (Government Procurement);

Committee on Small and Medium Enterprises, in accordance
with Article 13.4 (Committee on Small and Medium
Enterprises) of Chapter 13 (Small and Medium-Sized
Enterprises);

220

(i) Committee on Economic Cooperation, in accordance with
Article 15.3 (Committee on Economic Cooperation) of Chapter
15 (Economic Cooperation);

(j) Committee on Islamic Economy Cooperation in accordance
with Article 14.12 (Committee on Islamic Economy
Cooperation) of Chapter 14 (Islamic Economy).

Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, any committee or
subsidiary body shall:

(a) | be composed of representatives of the Parties;
(b) be chaired jointly by the Parties;

(c) take decisions on any matter within its functions by mutual
agreement; and

(d) meet annually or as mutually determined by the Parties.
Meetings may be conducted in person or by any other means
of communication as mutually determined by the Parties.

The committees and subsidiary bodies shall inform the Joint
Committee of their schedule and agenda sufficiently in advance of
their meetings. They shall report to the Joint Committee on their
activities at each regular meeting of the Joint Committee. The
creation or existence of a committee or subsidiary body shall not
prevent either Party from bringing any matter directly to the Joint
Committee.

The Joint Committee may decide to change the task assigned to a
committee or subsidiary body, undertake itself the task assigned to a
committee or subsidiary body, or dissolve a committee or subsidiary
body.

221

Article 18.3: Contact Points

1.

In order to facilitate communications between the Parties on any
trade matter covered by this Agreement, the Parties hereby establish
the following contact points:

(a) for United Arab Emirates, the Ministry of Economy; and

(b) ~— for Indonesia, the Ministry of Trade;
or their respective successors.

Upon request of either Party, the contact point of the other Party shall
indicate the office or official responsible for any matter relating to the
implementation of this Agreement, and provide the required support
to facilitate communications with the requesting Party. Each Party
shall notify the other Party of any changes in its contact point.

All official communications in relation to this Agreement shall be in
the English language.

222

CHAPTER 19

Final Provisions

Article 19.1: Annexes, Appendices, Side Letters, and Footnotes

The Annexes, Appendices, side letters, and footnotes to this Agreement
constitute an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 19.2: Amendments

This Agreement may be amended by written agreement between the
Parties. Either Party may submit proposals for amendments to this
Agreement to the Joint Committee for consideration. Upon agreement
between the Parties, amendments to this Agreement shall enter into force
in the same manner as provided for in Article 19.6 (Entry into Force), unless
otherwise agreed by the Parties.

Article 19.3: Amendment of International Agreements

If any international agreement, or a provision therein, referred to in this
Agreement or incorporated into this Agreement is amended, the Parties
shall, on request, consult on whether it is necessary to amend this
Agreement, unless this Agreement provides otherwise.

Article 19.4: Accession

Any country or group of countries may accede to this Agreement subject to
such terms and conditions as may be agreed between the country or group
of countries and the Parties and following approval in accordance with the
applicable legal requirements and procedures of each Party and acceding
country.

223

Article 19.5: Duration and Termination

This Agreement shall remain in force unless terminated pursuant to
paragraph 2.

Either Party may terminate this Agreement by written notification to
the other Party, and such termination shall take effect six months
after the date of the notification.

Article 19.6: Entry into Force

This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month
following the date of the receipt of the last written notification through the
diplomatic channels by which the Parties inform each other that all
necessary requirements have been fulfilled, unless the Parties agree
otherwise.

Article 19.7: General Review of the Agreement

1.

In accordance with Article 18.1 (Joint Committee), the Joint
Committee shall undertake a general review of this Agreement five
years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and every
five years thereafter, with a view to updating and enhancing this
Agreement to further its objectives, through negotiations, as
appropriate. The review shall include, but not be limited to,
consideration of deepening liberalisation, reducing or eliminating
remaining discrimination, further expanding market access and
improving facilitation and cooperation to foster the utilisation of this
Agreement.

In conducting a review under this Article, the Joint Committee shall
take into account:

(a) — the work of all committees and subsidiary bodies established
under this Agreement;

(b) relevant developments in international fora; and

(c) input from experts, as appropriate.

224

Article 19.8: Authentic Texts

This Agreement is done in duplicate in the Indonesian, English, and Arabic
languages. All texts of this Agreement shall be equally authentic. In case of
divergence of interpretation, the English text shall prevail.