RECOGNISING the common wish to strengthen the links between the EFTA States and
Malaysia by establishing close and lasting trade relations through this Economic
Partnership Agreement (Agreement);

REAFFIRMING their commitment to democracy, the rule of law, human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with each Party’s respective obligations under
international law, including as set out in the United Nations Charter and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights;

DESIRING to create favourable conditions for the development and diversification of
trade between them and for the promotion of commercial and economic cooperation in
areas of common interest on the basis of mutual benefit, non-discrimination and
international law;

RECOGNISING the importance of trade facilitation in promoting efficient and
transparent procedures to reduce costs and to ensure predictability for the trading
communities of the Parties;

DETERMINED to promote and further strengthen the multilateral trading system,
building on their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakesh Agreement
establishing the World Trade Organisation (WTO Agreement) and other agreements
negotiated thereunder, thereby contributing to the harmonious development and
expansion of world trade;

REAFFIRMING their commitment to promote the development of international trade
in such a way as to contribute to the objective of sustainable development;

RECOGNISING the importance of coherence and mutual supportiveness of trade,
environment and labour policies;

REAFFIRMING their commitment to protect and enforce labour rights, improve
working conditions and living standards, strengthen cooperation and the Parties’ capacity
on labour issues;

RECALLING their rights and obligations under multilateral environmental agreements
to which they are a party, and the respect for the fundamental principles and rights at
work, including the principles set out in the relevant International Labour Organisation
(ILO) Conventions to which they are a party;

AIMING to create new employment opportunities, improve living standards and raise
the levels of protection of health, safety and the environment;

DETERMINED to implement this Agreement in line with the objectives to preserve and
protect the environment through sound environmental management that has been
enumerated under the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;

AFFIRMING their determination to prevent and combat corruption in international trade
and investment and to promote the principles of transparency and good public
governance;

ACKNOWLEDGING the importance of good corporate governance and corporate
social responsibility for sustainable development, and affirming their aim to encourage
enterprises to observe internationally recognised guidelines and principles in this respect,
such as the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and the UN Global Compact;

CONVINCED that this Agreement will enhance the competitiveness of their enterprises
in global markets and create conditions encouraging economic, trade and investment
relations between them;

HAVE AGREED, in pursuit of the above, to conclude the following Agreement:

CHAPTER 1

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 1.1

Objectives

1. The EFTA States and Malaysia hereby establish a free trade area in accordance
with the provisions of this Agreement, which is based on trade relations between market
economies.

2. The objectives of this Agreement are:

(a) to achieve the liberalisation of trade in goods, in conformity with Article
XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT 1994);

(b) to achieve the liberalisation of trade in services, in conformity with Article
V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS);

(c) to mutually enhance investment opportunities;

(d) to promote competition in their economies, particularly as it relates to
economic relations between the Parties;

(e) to achieve liberalisation on a mutual basis of the government procurement
markets of the Parties;

(f) to ensure adequate, effective protection and enforcement of intellectual
property rights;

(g) to develop international trade in such a way as to contribute to the
objective of sustainable development and to ensure that this objective is
integrated and reflected in the Parties’ trade relationship; and

(h) thereby to contribute to the harmonious development and expansion of
world trade.

ARTICLE 1.2

Scope of Application
1. Except as otherwise specified in Annex I (Rules of Origin and Administrative

Cooperation), this Agreement shall apply:

(a) to the land territory, internal waters and the territorial sea of a Party, and
the air-space above the territory of a Party, in accordance with domestic
and international law; and

(b) beyond the territorial sea, with respect to measures taken by a Party in the
exercise of its sovereign rights or jurisdiction in accordance with domestic
and international law.

2. This Agreement shall not apply to the Norwegian territory of Svalbard, with the
exception of trade in goods.

ARTICLE 1.3

Trade Relations Governed by this Agreement

1. This Agreement shall apply to the trade relations between, on the one side, the
individual EFTA States and, on the other side, Malaysia, but not to the trade relations
between individual EFTA States, unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement.

2. As a result of the customs union established by the Customs Treaty of 29 March
1923 between Switzerland and Liechtenstein, Switzerland shall represent Liechtenstein
in matters covered thereby.

ARTICLE 1.4

Relationship to Other International Agreements

1. The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement and
other agreements negotiated thereunder to which they are a party, and any other
international agreements to which they are a party.

2. If a Party considers that the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free
trade areas, arrangements for frontier trade or other preferential agreements by another
Party has the effect of altering the trade regime provided for by this Agreement, it may
request consultations. The Party concluding such agreement shall afford adequate
opportunity for consultations with the requesting Party with a view to reaching a mutually
satisfactory solution.

ARTICLE 1.5

Central, Regional and Local Government

The Parties shall take any general or specific measures required to fulfil their
obligations under this Agreement. Subject to the provisions of this Agreement, each Party
shall ensure within its territory the observance of all obligations and commitments under
this Agreement by its respective central, regional and local governments and authorities,
and by non-governmental bodies in the exercise of governmental powers delegated to
them by central, regional and local governments or authorities.

ARTICLE 1.6

Transparency and Confidentiality

1. Each Party shall publish or otherwise make publicly available, their laws,
regulations, judicial decisions and administrative rulings of general application as well as
their respective international agreements that may affect the operation of this Agreement.

2. Each Party shall promptly respond to specific questions and provide, upon
request, information to another Party on matters referred to in paragraph 1.

3. Nothing in this Agreement shall require any Party to disclose confidential
information that would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public
interest or that would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular
enterprises, public or private. Where a Party provides information to another Party in
accordance with this Agreement and designates the information as confidential, that Party
shall maintain the confidentiality of the information.

4. In case of any inconsistency between this Article and provisions relating to
transparency in other parts of this Agreement, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the
inconsistency.

CHAPTER 2
TRADE IN NON-AGRICULTURAL GOODS

ARTICLE 2.1
Scope

This Chapter applies to trade between the Parties relating to goods as set out in
Annex II (Product Coverage of Non-Agricultural Goods).

ARTICLE 2.2
Definitions

For the purpose of this Agreement:

(a) “originating goods” means the goods that qualify as originating goods in
accordance with Annex I (Rules of Origin and Administrative
Cooperation);

(b) “goods” includes manufactured goods and commodities in their raw, semi-

processed and processed forms;

(c) “import duties” means any duty or charge of any kind imposed in
connection with the importation of goods, including any form of surtax or
surcharge, but does not include any:

(1) charges equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with
Article IN of GATT 1994;

(11) fees or other charges in connection with the importation
commensurate with the cost of services rendered in accordance
with Article VIII of GATT 1994; and

(111) anti-dumping, countervailing duties or safeguard duties which are
applied in accordance with Chapter 6 (Trade Remedies).

ARTICLE 2.3

Import Duties

1. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, Malaysia shall abolish or reduce its
import duties on goods originating in an EFTA State covered by Article 2.1 (Scope), in
accordance with the terms and conditions set out in Annex III (Reduction or Elimination
of Import Duties).

2. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, the EFTA States shall abolish all import
duties on goods originating in Malaysia covered by Article 2.1 (Scope).

3. No Party may increase an existing import duty nor introduce a new import duty
on originating goods of another Party.

ARTICLE 2.4

Customs Valuation!

For the purpose of determining the customs value of goods traded between the
Parties, Article VI of the GATT 1994 and Part I of the Agreement on Implementation of
Article VII of the GATT 1994 apply and are hereby incorporated into and made part of
this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

ARTICLE 2.5

Quantitative Restrictions

1. With respect to the rights and obligations of the Parties concerning quantitative
restrictions, Article XI of the GATT 1994 applies and is hereby incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. A Party introducing a measure in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article XI of the
GATT 1994 shall promptly notify the Joint Committee. A notification by a Party in
accordance with Article XI of the GATT 1994 shall be deemed equivalent to a notification
under this Agreement.

3. Any measure applied in accordance with this Article shall be of limited duration,
non-discriminatory, transparent and may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy
circumstances described in paragraph 2 of Article XI of the GATT 1994 and may not
create unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

ARTICLE 2.6

Rules of Origin and Methods of Administrative Cooperation

The rules of origin and administrative cooperation are set out in Annex I (Rules
of Origin and Administrative Cooperation).

ARTICLE 2.7

Classification of Goods

The classification of goods shall be in conformity with the Harmonised
Commodity Description and Coding System (Harmonised System or HS).

Switzerland applies customs duties based on weight and quantity rather than ad valorem duties.

_9-

ARTICLE 2.8

Fees and Formalities

Article VIII of the GATT 1994 applies, and is hereby incorporated into and made
part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

ARTICLE 2.9

National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulations

Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of another Party in
accordance with Article HI of the GATT 1994, which applies and is hereby incorporated
into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

ARTICLE 2.10

Technical Amendments

1. The Parties shall, following the periodic amendments to the HS by the World
Customs Organisation (WCO), transpose its Annex III (Reduction or Elimination of
Customs Duties), Annexes IV-VI (Schedules of Tariff Commitments on Agriculture from
the EFTA States) and Appendix 1 (Product Specific Rules (PSR)) to Annex I (Rules of
Origin and Administrative Cooperation) accordingly.

2. The transposition of the Schedules of Tariff Commitments and the PSR as a result
of periodic amendments to the HS by the WCO or other technical adjustments in the
respective tariff nomenclature shall not impair commitments listed in the Annex III
(Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties), Annexes IV-VI (Schedules of Tariff
Commitments Agriculture from the EFTA States) and Appendix 1 (PSR) to Annex I
(Rules of Origin and Administrative Cooperation).

3. Upon request of one or several Parties and within a reasonable period of time after
receiving the request, the requested Party shall address any concerns raised regarding the
transposed tariff commitments or PSR under this Agreement.

4. In the Schedules of Tariff Commitments and the PSR according to paragraph 1,
the version of the HS and the year shall be indicated.

ARTICLE 2.11

Exchange of Trade Data

I. The Parties recognise the value of trade data in the accurate analysis of the
utilisation and the impact of this Agreement on trade between the Parties. The Parties
shall annually exchange data on the most-favoured-nation (MFN) tariff rates, preferential
tariff rates under this Agreement and import statistics (preferential and MFN) between
them.

-10-

2. Import statistics shall pertain to the most recent calendar year available. If there
has been a revision in the previously submitted data pertaining to the three most recent
calendar years, a revised version of the data shall be submitted. The preferential tariff
rates and applied MFN tariff rates exchanged shall pertain to the same year as the import
statistics. Upon request, the Parties may exchange additional information and
explanations.

3. Subject to the availability of data, the exchange of import statistics and tariff rates
shall start in the year following the first full calendar year the Agreement was in force.
The Parties shall exchange all relevant data no later than three years from the date of the
entry into force of this Agreement.

4. Each Party shall establish a designated contact point. The contact points, shall, as
appropriate, jointly determine the details concerning the nature and format of data to be
exchanged.

5. Each Party shall give consideration to a request from another Party for technical
cooperation with regard to exchange of data under paragraph 1 and 2.

6. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, no Party shall be obliged to exchange data
which is confidential in accordance with its domestic laws and regulations.

7. The Parties shall exchange information in English.

ARTICLE 2.12

Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods

1. A Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods (Sub-Committee) under the Joint
Committee, comprising representatives of each Party, is hereby established.

2. The functions of the Sub-Committee are set out in Annex VII (Functions of the
Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods).

ARTICLE 2.13

State Trading Enterprises

With respect to the rights and obligations of the Parties concerning state trading
enterprises, Article XVII of the GATT 1994 and the Understanding on the Interpretation
of Article XVII of the GATT 1994 apply and are hereby incorporated into and made part
of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

ARTICLE 2.14

Balance-of-Payments

1. A Party in serious balance-of-payments difficulties, or under imminent threat
thereof, may, in accordance with the conditions established under the GATT 1994 and the WTO Understanding on the Balance-of-Payments Provisions of the GATT 1994, adopt
trade restrictive measures, which shall be of limited duration and non-discriminatory, and
may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance-of-payments situation.

2. A Party introducing a measure under this Article shall promptly notify the other
Parties thereof.

ARTICLE 2.15

Trade Facilitation
The provisions on trade facilitation are laid out in Annex VHI (Customs
Procedures and Trade Facilitation).
ARTICLE 2.16

General Exceptions

For the purposes of this Chapter, Article XX of the GATT 1994 applies and is
hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

ARTICLE 2.17

Security Exceptions

For the purposes of this Chapter, Article XXI of the GATT 1994 applies and is
hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

-12-

CHAPTER 3

TRADE IN AGRICULTURAL GOODS

ARTICLE 3.1
Scope

This Chapter applies to trade between the Parties relating to goods other than those
covered in Annex II (Product Coverage of Non-Agricultural Goods).

ARTICLE 3.2

Tariff Concessions

1. Malaysia shall grant tariff concessions on agricultural goods originating in an
EFTA State as specified in Annex III (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties).

2. Each EFTA State shall grant tariff concessions on agricultural goods originating
in Malaysia as specified in Annexes IV-VI (Schedule of tariff commitments agriculture
from the EFTA States).

ARTICLE 3.3

Other Provisions

I. With regard to trade in agricultural goods referred to in this Chapter, the following
provisions apply, mutatis mutandis: Articles 2.2 (Definitions), 2.4 (Customs Valuation),
2.5 (Quantitative Restrictions), 2.6 (Rules of Origin and Methods of Administrative
Cooperation), 2.7 (Classifications of Goods), 2.8 (Fees and Formalities), 2.9 (National
Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulations), 2.10 (Technical Amendments), 2.11
(Exchange of Trade Data), 2.12 (Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods), 2.13 (State Trading
Enterprises), 2.14 (Balance-of-Payments), 2.15 (Trade Facilitation), 2.16 (General
Exceptions), 2.17 (Security Exceptions), Chapter 4 (Technical Barriers to Trade), Chapter
5 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and Chapter 6 (Trade Remedies).

2. With regard to Article 2.6 (Rules of Origin and Methods of Administrative
Cooperation), only bilateral accumulation between the individual Parties shall be allowed
for goods covered by this Chapter.

-13-

ARTICLE 3.4
Dialogue

The Parties shall examine any difficulties that might arise in their trade in
agricultural goods and shall endeavour to seek appropriate solutions through dialogue and
consultations.

ARTICLE 3.5

Further Liberalisation

The Parties undertake to continue their efforts with a view to achieving further
liberalisation of their trade in agricultural goods, taking into account the arrangements for
processed agricultural goods, the pattern of trade in agricultural goods between the
Parties, the particular sensitivities of such goods, the development of each Party’s
agricultural policy and developments in bilateral and multilateral fora. With a view to
achieving this objective, the Parties may consult in conjunction with the Joint Committee
meetings.

-14-

CHAPTER 4

TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE

ARTICLE 4.1
Objectives

1. The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) further the implementation of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers
to Trade (TBT Agreement);

(b) facilitate bilateral trade and access to respective markets for goods falling
within the scope of this Chapter;

(c) facilitate information exchange and cooperation in the field of technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment between the Parties, and
enhance mutual understanding of each Party’s regulatory system;

(d) eliminate, reduce or prevent unnecessary obstacles to trade between the
Parties, in particular to avoid duplications in conformity assessment
procedures; and

(e) address, with a view to solve, trade concerns affecting bilateral trade
within the scope of this Chapter.

ARTICLE 4.2
Scope

1. This Chapter shall apply to the preparation, adoption and application of all
standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures which may affect
trade in goods between the Parties, irrespective of their origin.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, this Chapter shall not apply to:

(a) sanitary and phytosanitary measures covered by Chapter 5 (Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures); and

(b) purchasing specifications prepared by governmental bodies for production
or consumption requirements of governmental bodies.

ARTICLE 4.3

Incorporation of the TBT Agreement

Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, with respect to technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessments, the TBT Agreement applies and is
hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

-15-

ARTICLE 4.4

International Standards

For the purposes of this Chapter, standards issued by international standardising
bodies, in particular, but not limited to the International Organisation for Standardisation
(ISO), International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) and Codex Alimentarius shall be considered relevant
international standards in the sense of Article 2.4 of the TBT Agreement.

ARTICLE 4.5

Movement of Goods, Border Control and Market Surveillance

1. The Parties shall ensure that goods fully complying with the relevant technical
regulations of the importing Party can move within their respective territories, once
placed on the market.”

2. Where a Party detains, at a port of entry, goods imported from another Party, the
reasons for the detention shall be notified without undue delay to the importer or his or
her representative.

3. Where a Party withdraws from its market goods imported from another Party, the
reasons shall be notified without undue delay to the importer, his or her representative or
a person responsible for placing the goods on the market.

ARTICLE 4.6

Conformity Assessment Procedures

l. The Parties acknowledge that a broad range of mechanisms exist to facilitate the
acceptance in a Party’s territory of the results of conformity assessment procedures
conducted in another Party’s territory, including:

(a) agreements on mutual acceptance of the results of conformity assessment
procedures with respect to specified technical regulations conducted by
recognised conformity assessment bodies;

(b) voluntary arrangements between conformity assessment bodies in each
Party’s territory;

(c) use of accreditation based on international standards, to qualify conformity
assessment bodies;

(d) government designation of conformity assessment bodies;

(e) recognition by a Party of the results of conformity assessments performed
in the territory of another Party;

2 Depending on where the first placing of a good in Malaysia takes place, specific goods may not

move within Malaysia. The Malaysian contact point will notify the EFTA States of changes in this regime.

-16-

(f) use of regional or international arrangements and regional or international
recognition agreements to which the Parties are parties; and

(g) the importing Party’s acceptance of a supplier’s declaration of conformity,
based on international standards.

2. No Party shall prepare, adopt or apply conformity assessment procedures which
are likely to create unnecessary obstacles to trade and shall to this end:

(a) reinforce the role of international standards as a basis for technical
regulations, including conformity assessment procedures;

(b) promote the accreditation of conformity assessment bodies on the basis of
the relevant Standards and Guidelines of the ISO and the IEC; and

(c) encourage the mutual acceptance of conformity assessment results of
bodies accredited in accordance with subparagraph (b), which have been
recognised under the relevant international agreement.

3. If a Party requires a positive assurance of conformity with domestic technical
regulations, it should consider the acceptance of supplier’s declarations of conformity,
based on international standards.

ARTICLE 4.7

Cooperation

With a view to increasing the mutual understanding of their respective systems
and facilitating access to respective markets, the Parties shall strengthen their
cooperation, in particular in the following areas:

(a) activities of international standardisation bodies and the WTO Committee
on Technical Barriers to Trade;

(b) communication between each other’s competent authorities, exchange of
information in respect of technical regulations, good regulatory practice,
standards, conformity assessment procedures, border control and market
surveillance; and

(c) encouraging their respective standardisation, accreditation and metrology

bodies to cooperate, taking into account cooperation activities in relevant
international fora.

ARTICLE 4.8

Consultations

Consultations shall be held at the request of a Party which considers that another
Party has taken a measure which 1s likely to create, or has created, an obstacle to trade.
Such consultations shall take place within 40 days from the date of receipt of the request.

_17-

They may be conducted by any agreed method on a case-by-case basis with the objective
of finding mutually acceptable solutions.*

ARTICLE 4.9

Annexes

The Parties have concluded Annexes [X-XII (Electrical and Electronic Products,
Good Laboratory Practice, Good Manufacturing Practice, Marking and Labelling) to this
Agreement to prevent, eliminate, or reduce unnecessary non-tariff barriers to trade,
including to avoid duplicative and unnecessarily burdensome conformity assessment
procedures in specific good sectors. The Parties may conclude further Annexes and side
agreements in the future.

ARTICLE 4.10

Review Clause

The Parties shall consider extending to each other equivalent treatment related to
technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures granted by each
Party to the European Union (EU), three years after the date of entry into force of this
Agreement and thereafter, upon request by a Party. Such treatment may take the form of
a sector specific arrangement. This provision exclusively concerns the trade relations
between the Parties and does not lead to any obligations towards the EU.

ARTICLE 4.11

Contact Points

The Parties shall exchange names and addresses of contact points for this Chapter
in order to facilitate communication and the exchange of information.

3 It is understood that consultations pursuant to this paragraph shall be without prejudice to the rights
and obligations of the Parties under Chapter 15 (Dispute Settlement) or under the WTO Understanding on
Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes.

-18-

CHAPTER 5

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

ARTICLE 5.1
Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) further the implementation of the WTO Agreement on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Agreement (SPS Agreement);

(b) facilitate trade in food, animals and plants, including their goods, while
protecting human, animal or plant life or health in the territory of each
Party;

(c) deepen mutual understanding of each Party’s regulations and procedures
relating to sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

(d) address, with a view to solve, trade concerns affecting bilateral trade
within the scope of this Chapter; and

(e) strengthen communication, consultation and cooperation between the
Parties on sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

ARTICLE 5.2

Scope and Coverage

This Chapter applies to sanitary and phytosanitary measures which may, directly
or indirectly, affect trade between the Parties.

ARTICLE 5.3

Affirmation and Incorporation of the SPS Agreement

1. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other
under the SPS Agreement.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, the SPS Agreement applies and is hereby
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

-19-

ARTICLE 5.4
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, “international standards” means the standards,
guidelines and recommendations defined in paragraph 3 of Annex A of the SPS
Agreement.*

ARTICLE 5.5

Audits

1. An importing Party shall base its audits of the exporting Party on international
standards, guidelines and recommendations.

2. System audits shall be the preferred assessment method. The system audit may
include the on-site inspections of facilities.

3. The costs incurred by the auditing Party shall be borne by the importing Party,
unless both Parties decide otherwise.

4. The importing Party shall provide information in writing to the exporting Party
within 90 days after the audit. The exporting Party may comment on such information
within 30 days from the date of receipt. These comments shall be included in the
assessment report.

ARTICLE 5.6

Certificates

l. The Parties agree to cooperate in order to minimise the number of sanitary and
phytosanitary certificates as far as possible. Where such certificates are required, they
should be in line with international standards, guidelines and recommendations and shall
be made available in English.

2. Notwithstanding the Party’s existing rights and obligations in relation to the
notification under the SPS Agreement, the notifying Party shall, upon request, provide
supplementary rationale to the exporting Party with regard to the new or modified
certificate. The exporting Party shall be given a reasonable period of time to adapt to the
new requirements.

ARTICLE 5.7

Cooperation

1. The Parties shall:

4 This includes the Codex Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification

Systems (CCFICS).

-20 -

(a) strengthen their cooperation with a view to increasing the mutual
understanding of their respective systems and facilitating access to
respective markets. Such cooperation includes, but is not limited to,
collaboration between the relevant institutions that provides the Parties
with scientific advice and risk analysis; and

(b) explore opportunities for further cooperation, collaboration and
information exchange with the other Party on sanitary and phytosanitary
matters of mutual interest consistent with the objectives of this Chapter.

2. Consistent with Article 5.1 (Objectives), each Party agrees to further explore and
strengthen technical cooperation as set out in Chapter 13 (Cooperation and Capacity
Building).

3. The Parties shall ensure that all adopted sanitary and phytosanitary regulations are
published and available on the internet. Upon request, a Party shall provide
supplementary information regarding import requirements in English.

4. Notwithstanding the Party’s existing rights and obligations in relation to the
notification under the SPS Agreement, the notifying Party, upon request, when
introducing new sanitary and phytosanitary measures, will provide supplementary
justifications for the measure.

ARTICLE 5.8

Movement of Goods

l. An importing Party shall ensure free movement of goods complying with its
relevant sanitary and phytosanitary requirements with no less favourable treatment than
that accorded to domestic goods once placed on its market.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1 above, the movement of goods in Malaysia is
subject to the relevant domestic laws and regulations applicable to Peninsular Malaysia,
Sabah and Sarawak.

ARTICLE 5.9

Import Checks

1. The import requirements and checks applied to imported goods including live
animals shall be based on the risk that is associated with such goods and shall be applied
in a non-discriminatory manner. Import checks shall be carried out without undue delay,
in a manner that is no more trade-restrictive than necessary.

2. Information about the frequency of import checks or changes in this frequency
shall be exchanged on request between competent authorities.

3. Import checks should be in accordance with international standards, guidelines
and recommendations.

-21-

4. Each Party shall ensure that the clearance process for goods not subject to random
and routine checks are undertaken without undue delay. Goods subject to random and
routine checks should not be detained pending test results.

5. The importing Party shall notify the importer or its representative or the competent
authority of the exporting Party or the embassy if the competent authority is not known
of a non-compliant consignment including the reason for non-compliance and provide
them with an opportunity to appeal the decision.

6. If a good is detained at the border due to a perceived risk, the necessary
investigations as well as decision on clearance shall be undertaken as soon as possible to
avoid any delays, in particular to prevent the deterioration of perishable goods.

7. When a Party detains, at a port of entry, goods exported from another Party due
to non-conformity with a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, the reasons for the detention
shall be promptly notified to the importer or his or her representative.

8. If goods are rejected at a port of entry, each Party shall ensure that the importer or
his or her representative may appeal the decision.

9. When goods are rejected at a port of entry due to a serious sanitary or
phytosanitary non-conformity, the competent authority in the exporting Party shall be
informed as soon as possible.

ARTICLE 5.10

Consultations

If a Party has concerns regarding any matter arising under this Chapter with
another Party, the Party may request consultations to address the matter. Such
consultations shall take place, without undue delay, using any agreed method, with a view
of finding mutually acceptable solutions. The Parties shall endeavour to resolve the matter
and may inform the Joint Committee thereof.

ARTICLE 5.11

Competent Authorities and Contact Points
I. The Parties shall exchange information on competent authorities and contact
details of contact points for this Chapter in order to facilitate communication and the

exchange of information.

2. In the event of changes in this information, the Parties shall notify each other.

-22-

CHAPTER 6

TRADE REMEDIES

ARTICLE 6.1

Subsidies and Countervailing Measures

1. The rights and obligations of the Parties relating to subsidies and countervailing
measures shall be governed by Articles VI and XVI of the GATT 1994 and the WTO
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, except as provided for in
paragraph 2.

2. Before a Party initiates an investigation to determine the existence, degree and
effect of any alleged subsidy in another Party, as provided for in Article 11 of the WTO
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, the Party considering initiating an
investigation shall notify in writing the Party whose goods are subject to investigation
and allow for a 25-day period with a view to finding a mutually acceptable solution. The
consultations shall take place within 15 days from the receipt of the notification. The
consultations may take place in the Joint Committee, unless the Parties making and
receiving the notification agree otherwise.

ARTICLE 6.2
Anti-Dumping

1. The rights and obligations of a Party relating to anti-dumping measures shall be
governed by Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Implementation
of Article VI of the GATT 1994 (the WTO Anti-Dumping Agreement), subject to
paragraphs 2 to 6. The Parties will endeavour to refrain from initiating anti-dumping
procedures against each other.

2. When a Party receives a properly documented application and before initiating an
investigation under the WTO Anti-Dumping Agreement, the Party shall, as soon as
possible, notify in writing the other Party whose goods are allegedly being dumped and
allow for consultations throughout the investigation with a view to finding a mutually
acceptable solution. The consultations shall take place in the Joint Committee, unless the
Parties making and receiving the notification agree otherwise.

3. A Party shall not initiate an anti-dumping investigation with regard to the same
good from the same Party within 12 months of a determination which resulted in the non-
application or revocation of anti-dumping measures or from the termination of a measure.

4. If a Party decides to impose an anti-dumping duty, the Party shall apply a duty
less than the margin of dumping, if such lesser duty would be adequate to remove the
injury to the domestic industry.

5. When anti-dumping margins are established, assessed or reviewed under Article

2, paragraph 9.3 and paragraph 9.5 of Article 9 and Article 11 of the WTO Anti-Dumping

23 -

Agreement, regardless of the comparison bases under subparagraph 2.4.2 of Article 2 of
the WTO Anti-Dumping Agreement, all individual margins, whether positive or negative,
shall be counted toward the average.

6. Five years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall,
in the Joint Committee, review whether there is a need to maintain the possibility to take
anti-dumping measures between them. If the Parties decide after the first review to
maintain this possibility, biennial reviews shall thereafter be conducted in the Joint
Committee.

ARTICLE 6.3

Global Safeguard Measures

1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of global safeguards shall be
governed by Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards,
except as provided for in paragraph 2.

2. In taking measures under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement
on Safeguards, a Party shall, consistent with its obligations under the WTO Agreements,
exclude imports of an originating good from a Party if such imports do not cause or
threaten to cause injury, in particular if the share of imports of that Party does not exceed
three percent of the total imports of the good concerned.

ARTICLE 6.4

Bilateral Safeguard Measures

I. Where during the transition period, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a
customs duty under this Agreement, any good originating in a Party is imported into the
territory of another Party in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to
domestic production, and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause serious
injury to the domestic industry of like or directly competitive goods in the territory of the
importing Party, the importing Party may take bilateral safeguard measures to the
minimum extent necessary to remedy or prevent the serious injury and _ facilitate
adjustment, subject to paragraphs 2 to 12.

2. If the conditions set out in paragraph | are met, the importing Party may:

(a) suspend the further reduction of any rate of customs duty provided for
under this Agreement for the good; or

(b) increase the rate of customs duty for the good to a level not to exceed the
lesser of:

(1) the MFN rate of duty applied at the time the bilateral safeguard
measure is taken; or

(ii) the MFN rate of duty applied on the day immediately preceding the
date of entry into force of this Agreement.

24 -

3. Bilateral safeguard measures shall only be taken upon clear evidence that
increased imports have caused or are threatening to cause serious injury pursuant to an
investigation in accordance with the procedures laid down in the WTO Agreement on
Safeguards, in particular Articles 3 and 4 thereof.

4. Bilateral safeguard measures may be taken during the transition period, which
shall be a period of five years beginning on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
In the case of a good subject to tariff dismantling as set out in Annexes II-VI (Reduction
or Elimination of Customs Duties and Schedules of tariff commitments agriculture from
the EFTA States) that lasts five or more years, the transition period shall be extended to
the end of the tariff dismantling period for that product. Bilateral safeguard measures shall
be taken for a period not exceeding two years. In very exceptional circumstances,
measures may be taken up to a total maximum period of three years. No bilateral
safeguard measures shall be applied to the import of a good which has previously been
subject to such a measure.

5. No Party may apply, with respect to the same good, at the same time, a measure
in accordance with:

(a) this Article;
(b) Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the WTO Safeguards Agreement; and
(c) Article 5 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.

6. A Party intending to apply or extend a bilateral safeguard measure shall offer to
the Party which may be affected by the bilateral safeguard measure compensation in the
form of concessions having substantially equivalent trade effects or equivalent to the
value of the additional duties expected to result from the bilateral safeguard measure.

7. The Party intending to apply or extend a bilateral safeguard measure pursuant to
this Article shall immediately, and in any case before taking or extending a measure,
notify the other Parties. The notification shall contain all pertinent information, including
evidence of serious injury or threat thereof caused by increased imports, a precise
description of the good concerned, and the proposed measure, as well as the proposed
date of introduction, expected duration and timetable for the progressive removal of the
measure and the offered compensation. In the case of an extension of a bilateral safeguard
measure, evidence that the domestic industry concerned is adjusting shall also be
provided. Upon request of a Party affected by the bilateral safeguard measure, the Party
applying or extending the bilateral safeguard measure shall to the extent possible provide
additional information.

8. Upon request of a Party, the Joint Committee shall, within 30 days from the date
of receipt of the notification, examine the information provided under paragraph 7 in
order to facilitate a mutually acceptable solution. In the absence of such solution, the
importing Party may adopt a bilateral safeguard measure pursuant to paragraph 2 to
remedy the problem and, in the absence of mutually agreed trade compensation, the Party
against whose good the bilateral safeguard measure is taken may take compensatory
action by suspending the application of substantially equivalent concessions to the Party
applying the bilateral safeguard measure. The application of a bilateral safeguard measure
and compensatory action shall be notified to the other Parties at least 30 days in advance.

-25-

In the selection of the bilateral safeguard measure and the compensatory action, priority
must be given to the action or measure which least disturbs the functioning of this
Agreement. A Party shall take compensatory action only for the minimum period
necessary to achieve the substantially equivalent trade effects and in any event, only while
the bilateral safeguard measure under paragraph 2 is being applied.

9. Regardless of its duration or whether it has been subject to extension, a bilateral
safeguard measure on a good shall be terminated at the end of the transition period.

10. Upon the termination of the bilateral safeguard measure, the rate of customs duty
shall be the rate which would have been in effect but for the measure.

11. In critical circumstances, where delay would cause damage which would be
difficult to repair, a Party may take a provisional bilateral safeguard measure pursuant to
a preliminary determination that there is clear evidence that increased imports as a result
of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement have caused or
threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic industry. The Party intending to take such
a measure shall immediately notify the other Parties thereof. The procedures set out in in
this Article shall be initiated within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notification.
Any compensation shall be based on the total period of application of the provisional
bilateral safeguard measure and of the bilateral safeguard measure.

12. Any provisional bilateral safeguard measure shall be terminated within 200 days
at the latest. The period of application of any such provisional bilateral safeguard measure
shall be counted as part of the duration, and any extension thereof, of the bilateral
safeguard measure, set out in paragraphs 2 and 4 respectively. Any tariff increases shall
be promptly refunded if the investigation described in paragraph 3 does not result in a
finding that the conditions of paragraph | are met.

- 26 -

CHAPTER 7

TRADE IN SERVICES

ARTICLE 7.1

Scope and Coverage
1. This Chapter applies to measures by a Party affecting trade in services.
2. For the purposes of this Chapter, measures by a Party means measures taken by:
(a) central, regional, or local governments and authorities;

(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central,
regional, or local governments or authorities.

3. This Chapter shall not apply to:
(a) government procurement;

(b) subsidies or grants, including government-supported loans, guarantees,
and insurance, provided by a Party or to any conditions attached to the
receipt or continued receipt of such subsidies or grants, whether or not
such subsidies or grants are offered exclusively to domestic services,
service consumers, or service suppliers;

(c) services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority;

(d) in respect of air transport services, measures affecting traffic rights
however granted, or measures affecting services directly related to the
exercise of traffic rights, other than measures affecting:

(1) aircraft repair and maintenance services;

(ii) the selling and marketing of air transport services;
(111) | computer reservation system (CRS) services;

(iv) airport operation services; and

(v) — ground handling services.

ARTICLE 7.2
Definitions

l. For the purposes of this Chapter:

_27-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

“trade in services” means the supply of a service:
(1) from the territory of a Party into the territory of another Party;
(ii) in the territory of a Party to the service consumer of another Party;

(111) by a service supplier of a Party, through commercial presence in
the territory of another Party;

(iv) by a service supplier of a Party, through presence of natural persons
of a Party in the territory of another Party;

“services” includes any service in any sector except services supplied in
the exercise of governmental authority;

“a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority” means any
service which is supplied neither on a commercial basis, nor in competition
with one or more service suppliers;

“measure” means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law,
regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other
form;

“supply of a service” includes the production, distribution, marketing, sale
and delivery of a service;

“measures by Parties affecting trade in services” includes measures with
respect to:

(i) the purchase, payment or use of a service;

(11) the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a service,
services which are required by those Parties to be offered to the
public generally;

(111) the presence, including commercial presence, of persons of a Party
for the supply of a service in the territory of another Party;

“commercial presence” means any type of business or professional
establishment, including through:

(1) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical person;
or

(11) | the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office;
within the territory of a Party for the purpose of supplying a service;
“sector of a service” means:

(1) with reference to a specific commitment, one or more, or all,
subsectors of that service, as specified in a Party’s Schedule;

(11) otherwise, the whole of that service sector, including all of its
subsectors;

- 28 -

(i)

(j)
(k)

(I)

(m)

(n)

(0)

(p)

“service of another Party” means a service which is supplied:

(1) from or in the territory of that other Party, or in the case of maritime
transport, by a vessel registered under the domestic laws and
regulations of that other Party, or by a person of that other Party
which supplies the service through the operation of a vessel and/or
its use in whole or in part; or

(11) | in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence
or through the presence of natural persons, by a service supplier of
that other Party;

“service supplier” means any person which supplies a service;°

“monopoly supplier of a service” means any person, public or private,
which in the relevant market of the territory of a Party is authorised or
established formally or in effect by that Party as the sole supplier of that
service;

“service consumer” means any person that receives or uses a service;
“person” means either a natural person or a juridical person;

“natural person of another Party” means a natural person who, under the
domestic laws and regulations of that other Party, is:

(1) a national of that other Party; or

(11) a permanent resident of that other Party who resides in the territory
of any Party, if that other Party accords substantially the same
treatment to its permanent residents as to its nationals in respect of
measures affecting trade in services.

“Juridical person” means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise
organised under the domestic laws and regulations of a Party, whether for
profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or governmentally
owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole
proprietorship or association;

“Juridical person of another Party” means a juridical person which 1s
either:

(1) constituted or otherwise organised under the domestic laws and
regulations of that other Party, and is engaged in substantive
business operations in the territory of any Party; or

This definition includes any person that seeks to supply services. Where the service is not supplied

or sought to be supplied directly by a juridical person but through other forms of commercial presence such
as a branch or a representative office, the service supplier (i.e. the juridical person) shall, nonetheless,
through such commercial presence be accorded the treatment provided for service suppliers under this
Chapter. Such treatment shall be extended to the commercial presence through which the service is supplied
or sought to be supplied and need not be extended to any other parts of the service supplier located outside
the territory where the service is supplied or sought to be supplied.

29 -

(11) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence,
owned or controlled by:

(aa) natural persons of that other Party; or

(bb) juridical persons of that other Party identified under
subparagraph (p) (1);

(q)  a juridical person is:

(i) “owned” by persons of a Party if more than 50 percent of the equity
interest in it is beneficially owned by persons of that Party;

(11) | “controlled” by persons of a Party if such persons have the power
to name a majority of its directors or otherwise to legally direct its
actions;

(ii1) “affiliated” with another person when it controls, or is controlled

by, that other person; or when it and the other person are both
controlled by the same person; and

(r) “direct taxes” comprises all taxes on total income, on total capital or on
elements of income or of capital, including taxes on gains from the
alienation of property, taxes on estates, inheritances and gifts, and taxes on
the total amounts of wages or salaries paid by enterprises, as well as taxes
on capital appreciation.

ARTICLE 7.3

Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

1. Without prejudice to measures taken in accordance with Article VII of the GATS,
and except as provided for in its List of MFN Exemptions contained in Annex XIV (List
of MFN Exemptions), each Party shall accord immediately and unconditionally, in respect
of all measures affecting the supply of services, to services and service suppliers of any
other Party treatment no less favourable than the treatment it accords to like services and
service suppliers of any non-Party.

2. Treatment granted under other existing or future agreements concluded by one of
the Parties and notified under Article V or Article Vbis of the GATS shall not be subject
to paragraph 1.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, if a Party concludes an agreement of the type
referred in the paragraph 2, it shall, upon request from another Party, afford adequate
opportunity to that Party to negotiate the benefits granted therein. Such a negotiation is
without prejudice to the final outcome.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall be so construed as to prevent any Party from
conferring or according advantages to adjacent countries in order to facilitate exchanges
limited to contiguous frontier zones of services that are both locally produced and
consumed.

- 30-

ARTICLE 7.4

Market Access

1. With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified in
subparagraph (a) of Article 7.2 (Definitions), each Party shall accord services and service
suppliers of another Party treatment no less favourable than that provided for under the
terms, limitations and conditions agreed and specified in its Schedule in Annex XIII
(Schedules of Specific Commitments).°

2. In sectors where market-access commitments are undertaken, the measures which
a Party shall not maintain or adopt either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the
basis of its entire territory, unless otherwise specified in its Schedule, are defined as:

(a) limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the form of
numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the
requirements of an economic needs test;

(b) limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the form
of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(c) limitations on the total number of service operations or on the total quantity
of service output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the
form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;’

(d) limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed in
a particular service sector or that a service supplier may employ and who
are necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific service in
the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(e) measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint
venture through which a service supplier may supply a service; and

(f) limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or
aggregate foreign investment.

ARTICLE 7.5

National Treatment

1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments, and subject to
any conditions and qualifications set out therein, each Party shall accord to services and
service suppliers of another Party, in respect of all measures affecting the supply of

6 If a Party undertakes a market-access commitment in relation to the supply of a service through

the mode of supply referred to in subparagraph (a) (1) of Article 7.2 (Definitions) and if the cross-border
movement of capital is an essential part of the service itself, that Party is thereby committed to allow such
movement of capital. If a Party undertakes a market-access commitment in relation to the supply of a service
through the mode of supply referred to in subparagraph (a) (iii) of Article 7.2 (Definitions), it is thereby
committed to allow related transfers of capital into its territory.

7 This subparagraph does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of services.

3] -

services, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own like services and
service suppliers.®

2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to services and
service suppliers of another Party, either formally identical treatment or formally different
treatment to that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.

3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less
favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services or service
suppliers of the Party compared to like services or service suppliers of another Party.

ARTICLE 7.6

Additional Commitments

The Parties may negotiate commitments with respect to measures affecting trade
in services not subject to scheduling under Articles 7.4 (Market Access) or 7.5 (National
Treatment), including those regarding qualifications, standards or licensing matters. Such
commitments shall be inscribed in a Party’s Schedule in Annex XIII (Schedules of
Specific Commitments).

ARTICLE 7.7

Domestic Regulation

1. In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Party shall ensure
that all measures of general application affecting trade in services are administered in a
reasonable, objective and impartial manner.

2. Each Party shall maintain or institute as soon as practicable judicial, arbitral or
administrative tribunals or procedures which provide, at the request of an affected service
supplier of another Party, for the prompt review of, and where justified, appropriate
remedies for, administrative decisions affecting trade in services. Where such procedures
are not independent of the agency entrusted with the administrative decision concerned,
the Party shall ensure that the procedures in fact provide for an objective and impartial
review.

3. Where authorisation is required by a Party for the supply of a service, the
competent authorities of that Party shall, within a reasonable period of time after the
submission of an application is considered complete under that Party’s domestic laws and
regulations, inform the applicant of the decision concerning the application. At the request
of the applicant, the competent authorities of that Party shall provide, without undue
delay, information concerning the status of the application.

8 Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require any Party to

compensate for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of the
relevant services or service suppliers.

.32-

4. With a view to ensuring that measures relating to qualification requirements and
procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements and procedures do not
constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in services, the Joint Committee shall take a
decision aiming at incorporating into the Agreement any disciplines developed in the
WTO in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article VI of the GATS. The Parties may also,
jointly or bilaterally, decide to develop further disciplines.

5. In sectors in which a Party has undertaken specific commitments, pending the
entry into force of a decision incorporating WTO disciplines for these sectors pursuant to
paragraph 4, and, if agreed between the Parties, disciplines developed jointly or bilaterally
under this Agreement pursuant to paragraph 4, the Party shall not apply qualification
requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements and
procedures that nullify or impair such specific commitments in a manner which is:

(a) not based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and
the ability to supply the service;

(b) |= more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service; or

(c) in the case of licensing procedures, in itself a restriction on the supply of
the service.

6. In determining whether a Party is in conformity with the obligation under
subparagraph 5(a), account shall be taken of international standards of relevant
international organisations’ applied by that Party.

7. In sectors where specific commitments regarding professional services are
undertaken, each Party shall provide for adequate procedures to verify the competence of
professionals of any other Party.

ARTICLE 7.8
Recognition

1. For the purpose of the fulfilment of its relevant standards or criteria for the
authorisation, licensing or certification of service suppliers, each Party shall give due
consideration to any requests by another Party to recognise the education or experience
obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted in that other Party. Such
recognition may be based upon an agreement or arrangement with that other Party, or
otherwise be accorded autonomously.

2. Where a Party recognises, by agreement or arrangement, the education or
experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted, in the
territory of a non-Party, that Party shall afford another Party adequate opportunity to
negotiate its accession to such an agreement or arrangement, whether existing or future,
or to negotiate a comparable agreement or arrangement with it. Where a Party accords
recognition autonomously, it shall afford adequate opportunity for another Party to

° The term “relevant international organisations” refers to international bodies whose membership
is open to the relevant bodies of at least all Parties.

.33-

demonstrate that the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or
certifications granted, in the territory of that other Party should also be recognised.

3. Any such agreement or arrangement or autonomous recognition shall be in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the WTO Agreement, in particular paragraph 3
of Article VII of the GATS.

ARTICLE 7.9

Movement of Natural Persons Supplying Services

1. This Article applies to measures affecting natural persons who are service
suppliers of a Party, and natural persons of a Party who are employed by a service supplier
of a Party, in respect of the supply of a service.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking access
to the employment market of a Party, nor shall it apply to measures regarding nationality,
citizenship, residence or employment on a permanent basis.

3. Natural persons covered by a specific commitment shall be allowed to supply the
service in accordance with the terms of that commitment.

4. This Chapter shall not prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the
entry of natural persons of another Party into, or their temporary stay in, its territory,
including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly
movement of natural persons across, its borders, provided that such measures are not
applied in such a manner as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to a Party under the

terms of a specific commitment. !?
ARTICLE 7.10
Transparency
1. Each Party shall publish promptly and, except in emergency situations, at the

latest by the time of their entry into force, all relevant measures of general application
which pertain to or affect the operation of this Chapter. International agreements
pertaining to or affecting trade in services to which a Party is a signatory shall also be
published.

2. Where publication as referred to in paragraph 1 is not practicable, such
information shall be made otherwise publicly available.

3. Nothing in this Chapter shall require a Party to provide confidential information,
the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the
public interest, or which would prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular
enterprises, public or private.

10 The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing
benefits under a specific commitment.

~34-

ARTICLE 7.11

Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers

1. Each Party shall ensure that any monopoly supplier of a service in its territory
does not, in the supply of the monopoly service in the relevant market, act in a manner
inconsistent with that Party’s obligations under Article 7.3 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment) and specific commitments.

2. Where a Party’s monopoly supplier competes, either directly or through an
affiliated company, in the supply of a service outside the scope of its monopoly rights and
which is subject to that Party’s specific commitments, the Party shall ensure that such a
supplier does not abuse its monopoly position to act in its territory in a manner
inconsistent with such commitments.

3. The provisions of this Article shall also apply to cases of exclusive service
suppliers, where a Party, formally or in effect:

(a) authorises or establishes a small number of service suppliers; and

(b) substantially prevents competition among those suppliers in its territory.

ARTICLE 7.12

Business Practices

1. The Parties recognise that certain business practices of service suppliers, other
than those falling under Article 7.11 (Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers), may
restrain competition and thereby restrict trade in services.

2. Each Party shall, at the request of another Party, enter into consultations with a
view to eliminating practices referred to in paragraph 1. The Party addressed shall accord
full and sympathetic consideration to such a request and shall cooperate through the
supply of publicly available non-confidential information of relevance to the matter in
question. The Party addressed shall also provide other information available to the
requesting Party, subject to its domestic laws and regulations and to the conclusion of
satisfactory agreement concerning the safeguarding of its confidentiality by the
requesting Party.

ARTICLE 7.13

Payments and Transfers

1. Except under the circumstances envisaged in Article 7.14 (Restrictions to
Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments), no Party shall apply restrictions on international
transfers and payments for current transactions relating to its specific commitments with
another Party.

- 35-

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the Parties under
the Articles of the Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), including the
use of exchange actions which are in conformity with the Articles of the Agreement of
the IMF, provided that a Party shall not impose restrictions on capital transactions
inconsistently with its specific commitments regarding such transactions, except under
Article 7.14 (Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments) or at the request of the
IMF.

ARTICLE 7.14

Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments

1. In the event of serious balance-of-payment and external financial difficulties or
threat thereof, a Party may adopt or maintain restrictions on trade in services on which it
has undertaken specific commitments, including on payments or transfers for transactions
related to such commitments. It is recognised that particular pressures on the balance-of-
payments of a Party in the process of economic development may necessitate the use of
restrictions to ensure, inter alia, the maintenance of a level of financial reserve adequate
for the implementation of its programme of economic development or economic
transition.

2. The restrictions referred to in paragraph 1:

(a) shall not discriminate against any other Party in comparison to non-Party;

(b) shall be consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the IMF;

(c) shall avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and
financial interest of any other Party;

(d) shall not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances described
in paragraph 1; and

(e) shall be temporary and be phased out progressively as the situation
specified in paragraph | improves.

3. In determining the incidence of such restrictions, the Parties may give priority to
the supply of services which are most essential to their economic or development
programmes. However, such restrictions shall not be adopted or maintained for the
purpose of protecting a particular services sector.

ARTICLE 7.15

General Exceptions

l, Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which
would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries
where like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade in services, nothing in
this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by a Party of

- 36 -

measures:
(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

(e)

11

necessary to protect public morals or to maintain public order; '!
necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

necessary to secure compliance with domestic laws or regulations which
are not inconsistent with this Chapter including those relating to:

(1) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with
the effects of a default on services contracts;

(1) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the
processing and dissemination of personal data and the protection
of confidentiality of individual records and accounts; or

(iii) safety;

inconsistent with Article 7.5 (National Treatment), provided that the
difference in treatment is aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective’
imposition or collection of direct taxes in respect of services or service
suppliers of other Parties;

inconsistent with Article 7.3 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), provided
that the difference in treatment is the result of an agreement on the
avoidance of double taxation or provisions on the avoidance of double
taxation in any other international agreement or arrangement by which the
Party is bound.

The public order exception may be invoked only where a genuine and sufficiently serious threat

is posed to one of the fundamental interests of society.

12

Measures that are aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or collection of direct

taxes include measures taken by a Party under its taxation system which:

(i)

(il)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)
(vi)

apply to non-resident service suppliers in recognition of the fact that the tax obligation of
non-residents is determined with respect to taxable items sourced or located in the Party’s
territory;

apply to non-residents in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes in the
Party’s territory;

apply to non-residents or residents in order to prevent the avoidance or evasion of taxes,
including compliance measures;

apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the territory of another Party in order
to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes on such consumers derived from sources
in the Party’s territory;

distinguish service suppliers subject to tax on worldwide taxable items from other service
suppliers, in recognition of the difference in the nature of the tax base between them; or
determine, allocate or apportion income, profit, gain, loss, deduction or credit of resident
persons or branches, or between related persons or branches of the same person, in order
to safeguard the Party’s tax base.

Tax terms or concepts in subparagraph (d) and in this footnote are determined according to tax definitions
and concepts, or equivalent or similar definitions and concepts, under the domestic law of the Party taking

the measure.

-37-

I.

ARTICLE 7.16

Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed:

(a)

(b)

(c)

to require a Party to furnish any information, the disclosure of which it
considers contrary to its essential security interests;

to prevent a Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for
the protection of its essential security interests:

(1) relating to the supply of services as carried out directly or indirectly
for the purpose of provisioning a military establishment;

(11) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials
from which they are derived;

(111) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations;
or

to prevent a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations
under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

ARTICLE 7.17

Schedules of Specific Commitments

Each Party shall set out in a schedule the specific commitments it undertakes
under Articles 7.4 (Market Access), 7.5 (National Treatment) and 7.6 (Additional
Commitments). With respect to sectors where such commitments are undertaken, each

Schedule shall specify:
(a) terms, limitations and conditions on market access;
(b) conditions and qualifications on national treatment;
(c) undertakings relating to additional commitments referred to in Article 7.6
(Additional Commitments); and
(d) where appropriate, the time frame for implementation of such

2.

3.

commitments; and the date of entry into force of such commitments.

Measures inconsistent with both Articles 7.4 (Market Access) and 7.5 (National
Treatment) shall be dealt with as provided for in paragraph 2 of Article XX of the GATS.

The Parties’ Schedules of Specific Commitments are set out in Annex XIII
(Schedules of Specific Commitments).

- 38 -

ARTICLE 7.18

Modification of Schedules

The Parties shall, upon written request by a Party, hold consultations to consider
any modification or withdrawal of a specific commitment in the requesting Party’s
Schedule of Specific Commitments. The consultations shall be held within three months
after the requesting Party made its request. In the consultations, the Parties shall aim to
ensure that a general level of mutually advantageous commitments no less favourable to
trade than that provided for in the Schedule of Specific Commitments prior to such
consultations is maintained. Modifications of Schedules of Specific Commitments are
subject to the procedures set out in Articles 14.2 (Joint Committee) and 16.2
(Amendments).

ARTICLE 7.19

Review

With the objective of further liberalising trade in services between them, the
Parties shall review at least every five years, or more frequently if so agreed, their
Schedules of Specific Commitments and their Lists of MFN Exemptions, taking into
account in particular any autonomous liberalisation and on-going work under the auspices
of the WTO. The first such review shall take place no later than five years from the entry
into force of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 7.20

Consultations on Subsidies

1. Notwithstanding Article 7.1 (Scope and Coverage), a Party which considers that
it is adversely affected by a subsidy of another Party may request ad hoc consultations
with that Party on such matters. Such request shall be accorded sympathetic
considerations.

2. No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 15 (Dispute
Settlement) for any request made or consultations held under this Article, or any other
dispute arising under this Article.

ARTICLE 7.21

Denial of Benefits

l, A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a national of a non-Party, or to a
juridical person of another Party that is owned or controlled by a non-Party or by a person
of a non-Party, if the denying Party:

(a) does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non-Party; or

- 39-

(b)

adopts or maintains measures related to the maintenance of international
peace and security, including the protection of human rights, which
prohibit transactions with that person or would be violated or
circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to that person.

ARTICLE 7.22

Annexes

The following Annexes form an integral part of this Chapter:

Annex XV (Financial Services);

Annex XVI (Telecommunication Services);

Annex XIII (Schedules of Specific Commitments); and
Annex XIV (Lists of MFN Exemptions).

- 40 -

CHAPTER 8

INVESTMENT

ARTICLE 8.1

Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter applies to commercial presence in all sectors as set out in Annex XVII
(Covered Sectors). This Chapter does not apply to commercial presence in services
sectors as set out in Article 7.1 (Coverage).!°

2. This Chapter does not include investment protection and shall be without
prejudice to the interpretation or application of other international agreements relating to
investment or taxation to which one or several EFTA States and Malaysia are parties. '*

3. This Chapter shall not apply to:

(a) subsidies or grants provided by a Party; and

(b) government procurement.

ARTICLE 8.2
Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) “Juridical person” means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise
organised under applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and
whether privately-owned or governmentally owned, including any
corporation, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship or association;

(b) “Juridical person of a Party” means a juridical person constituted or
otherwise organised under the domestic laws and regulations of a Party
and engaged in substantive business operations in that Party;

(c) “natural person” means a person who has the nationality, or is a permanent
resident, of a Party in accordance with its domestic laws and regulations;

(d) “commercial presence” means any type of business establishment,
including through:
18 It is understood that services specifically exempted from the scope of Chapter 7 (Trade in Services)
do not fall under the scope of this Chapter.
M4 For greater certainty, any dispute settlement mechanism in any existing or future investment

protection agreement to which one or several EFTA States and Malaysia are parties to is not applicable to
alleged breaches of this Chapter.

-Al -

(1) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical person,
or

(11) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office,

within the territory of another Party for the purpose of performing an economic activity.

ARTICLE 8.3

National Treatment

Each Party shall, subject to Article 8.4 (Reservations) and the reservations set out
in Annex XVIII (Investment Reservations), accord to juridical and natural persons of
another Party, and to the commercial presence of such persons, treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like situations, !> to its own juridical and natural persons,
and to the commercial presence of such persons.

ARTICLE 8.4

Reservations"

1. Article 8.3 (National Treatment) shall not apply to:

(a) any reservation pertaining to existing or future measures that is listed by a
Party in Annex XVIII (Investment Reservations);

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any reservation referred to in
subparagraph (a);

(c) an amendment to a reservation pertaining to existing measures to the extent
that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the reservation
with Article 8.3 (National Treatment), with respect to an EFTA State
consistent with Annex XVIII (Investment Reservations) and, with respect
to Malaysia consistent with its List A of Reservations under Annex XVIII
(Investment Reservations); and

(d) any new reservation adopted by a Party, and incorporated into Annex
XVUI (Investment Reservations) which does not affect the overall level of
commitments of that Party under this Agreement;

to the extent that such reservations are inconsistent with Article 8.3 (National Treatment).

2. As part of the reviews provided for in Article 8.12 (Review) the Parties undertake
to review periodically the status of the reservations set out in Annex XVIII (Investment
Reservations) with a view of possibly improving their commitments.

Is For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like situations” under this Article depends

on the totality of the circumstances.
16 For greater certainty, this Article does not entail a ratchet mechanism.

-42-

3. A Party may, at any time, either upon the request of another Party or unilaterally,
remove in whole or in part its reservations set out in Annex XVIII (Investment
Reservations) by written notification to the other Parties.

4. A Party may, at any time, incorporate a new reservation into Annex XVIII
(Investment Reservations) in accordance with subparagraph | (d) by written notification
to the other Parties. On receiving such written notification, another Party may request
consultations regarding the reservation. On receiving the request for consultations, the
Party incorporating the new reservation shall enter into consultations with the requesting
Party.

ARTICLE 8.5

Key Personnel

1. Each Party shall, subject to its domestic laws and regulations, and national
policies,'’ grant natural persons of another Party, and key personnel who are employed
by natural or juridical persons of another Party, entry and temporary stay in its territory
in order to engage in activities connected with commercial presence.

2. Each Party shall, subject to its domestic laws and regulations, and national
policies, permit natural or juridical persons of another Party, and their commercial
presence, to employ, in connection with commercial presence, any key personnel of the
natural or juridical person’s choice regardless of nationality and citizenship provided that
such key personnel has been permitted to enter, stay and work in its territory and that the
employment concerned conforms to the terms, conditions and time limits of the
permission granted to such key personnel.

3. The Parties shall, subject to their domestic laws and regulations, and national
policies, grant entry and temporary stay and provide any necessary confirming
documentation to the spouse and minor children of a natural person who has been granted
temporary entry, stay and authorisation to work in accordance with paragraphs | and 2.

ARTICLE 8.6

Right to Regulate

1. The Parties reaffirm their right to regulate within their jurisdictions to achieve
legitimate policy objectives, such as the protection of public health, safety, or the
environment.

2. A Party should not waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or
otherwise derogate from, such measures as an encouragement for the establishment,

M7 For greater certainty, “National policies” means those policies on entry and temporary stay of

natural persons of another Party and key personnel who are employed by natural or juridical persons of
another Party that are endorsed and announced by the government of a Party and made publicly available
in a written form.

- 43 -

acquisition, expansion or retention in its territory of a commercial presence of persons of
another Party or a non-Party.

ARTICLE 8.7

Consultations on Subsidies

1. Notwithstanding Article 8.1 (Scope and Coverage), a Party which considers that
it is adversely affected by a subsidy of another Party may request ad hoc consultations
with that Party on such matters. Such request shall be accorded sympathetic
considerations.

2. No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 15 (Dispute
Settlement) for any request made or consultations held under this Article, or any other
dispute arising under this Article.

ARTICLE 8.8

Transparency

1. Each Party shall publish promptly and, except in emergency situations, at the
latest by the time of their entry into force, all relevant measures of general application
which pertain to or affect the operation of this Chapter. International agreements
pertaining to or affecting commercial presence in non-services sectors to which a Party is
a signatory shall also be published.

2. Where publication in accordance with paragraph 1 is not practicable, such
information shall be made otherwise publicly available.

3. Nothing in this Chapter shall require a Party to provide confidential information,
the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the
public interest, or which would prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular
juridical persons, public or private.

ARTICLE 8.9

Payments and Transfers

l. Except under the circumstances referred to in Article 8.10 (Restrictions to
Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments), no Party shall apply restrictions on international
transfers and payments for current transactions relating to commercial presence activities
in non-services sectors as covered in this Chapter.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the Parties under
the Articles of the Agreement of IMF, including the use of exchange actions which are in
conformity with the Articles of the Agreement of IMF, provided that no Party shall impose

44 -

restrictions on capital transactions!® relating to commercial presence activities in non-
services sectors as covered under this Chapter, except under Article 8.9 (Restrictions to
Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments) or at the request of the IMF.

ARTICLE 8.10

Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments

I. In the event of serious balance-of-payments and external financial difficulties or
threat thereof, a Party may adopt or maintain restrictions on commercial presence in the
non-services sectors, including on payments or transfers for transactions. It is recognised
that particular pressure on the balance of payments of a Party in the process of economic
development may necessitate the use of restrictions to ensure, inter alia, the maintenance
of a level of financial reserve adequate for the implementation of its programme of
economic development.

2. The restrictions referred to in paragraph 1:
(a) shall not discriminate against the other Party in comparison to non-Party;
(b) shall be consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the IMF;

(c) shall avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and
financial interest of any other Party;

(d) shall not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances described
in paragraph 1; and

(e) shall be temporary and be phased out progressively as the situation
specified in paragraph 1 improves.

3. In determining the incidence of such restrictions, Parties may give priority to the
commercial presence in non-services sectors which are more essential to their economic
or development programmes. However, such restrictions shall not be adopted or
maintained for the purpose of protecting a particular non-services sector.

ARTICLE 8.11

General Exceptions

For the purposes of this Chapter Article XIV of the GATS and the chapeau and
subparagraphs (f) and (g) of Article XX of the GATT 1994 apply and are hereby
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

18 For greater certainty, the Parties are committed to allow transfers of capital relating to commercial

presence activities in non-services sectors as covered in this Chapter into and out of their territories.

-~45-

ARTICLE 8.12

Security Exceptions

For the purposes of this Chapter, paragraph 1 of Article XIVbis of the GATS and
subparagraph (b) (11) of Article XXI of the GATT 1994 apply and are hereby incorporated
into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

ARTICLE 8.13
Review

This Chapter shall be subject to periodic review within the framework of the Joint
Committee regarding the possibility to further develop the Parties’ commitments.

ARTICLE 8.14

Denial of Benefits

l. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a national of a non-Party, or to a
juridical person of another Party that is owned or controlled by a non-Party or by a person
of a non-Party, if the denying Party:

(a) does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non-Party; or

(b) adopts or maintains measures related to the maintenance of international
peace and security, including the protection of human rights, which
prohibit transactions with that person or would be violated or
circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to that person.

- 46 -

CHAPTER 9

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

ARTICLE 9.1

Protection of Intellectual Property

1. The Parties shall grant and ensure adequate, effective and non-discriminatory
protection of intellectual property rights, and provide for measures for the enforcement
of such rights against infringement thereof, counterfeiting and piracy, in accordance with
this Chapter and Annex XIX (Protection of Intellectual Property), and the international
agreements referred to therein.

2. With respect to intellectual property rights covered by this Chapter, Annex XIX
(Protection of Intellectual Property), and in the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), each Party shall accord
another Party’s nationals’ treatment no less favourable than that it accords its own
nationals. Exemptions from this obligation must be in accordance with Articles 3 and 5
of the TRIPS Agreement.

3. Each Party shall grant another Party’s nationals treatment no less favourable than
that it accords nationals of a non-Party. If a Party concludes a trade agreement containing
provisions on the protection of intellectual property rights with a non-Party, notified under
Article XXIV of the GATT 1994, it shall notify the other Parties within reasonable time
and accord them treatment no less favourable than that provided under such agreement.
The Party concluding such an agreement shall, upon request by another Party, negotiate
the incorporation into this Agreement of provisions granting treatment no less favourable
than that provided under that agreement. Exemptions from this obligation must be in
accordance with the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, in particular Articles 4 and 5
thereof.

4. In accordance with Article 14.2 (Joint Committee), the Parties may also undertake
reviews in the light of any relevant new developments which might warrant modifications
or amendments of this Chapter and Annex XIX (Intellectual Property Rights) with a view
to improving the intellectual property system.

ARTICLE 9.2

General Provision

The Parties may, but shall not be obliged to, implement in their domestic laws and
regulations more extensive protection than required by this Chapter, provided that such
protection does not contravene this Chapter. The Parties shall be free to determine the
appropriate method of implementing this Chapter within their own legal system and
practice.

_47-

CHAPTER 10

GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT

ARTICLE 10.1

Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter applies to any measure of a Party regarding covered procurement.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, “covered procurement” means procurement for
governmental purposes:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)

of goods, services, or any combination thereof

(1) as specified in each Party’s Appendices to Annex XX (Government
Procurement); and

(11) not procured with a view to commercial sale or resale, or for use in
the production or supply of goods or services for commercial sale
or resale;

by any contractual means, including purchase, lease, rental or hire
purchase, with or without an option to buy;

for which the value, as estimated in accordance with the rules specified in
Appendix 9 (Value of Thresholds) to Annex XX (Government
Procurement) equals or exceeds the relevant threshold specified in
Appendices | to 3 (Entities at Central Government Level, Entities at Sub-
Central Government Level and Other Covered Entities) to Annex XX
(Government Procurement) at the time of publication of a notice in
accordance with Article 10.10 (Notices);

by a procuring entity; and

that is not otherwise excluded pursuant to this Agreement.

3. Unless otherwise provided in a Party’s schedule to Annex XX (Government
Procurement), this Chapter does not apply to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

acquisition or rental of land, existing buildings, or other immovable
property or the rights thereon;

non-contractual agreements or any form of assistance that a Party,
including its procuring entities, provides, including cooperative
agreements, grants, loans, equity infusions, guarantees, subsidies, fiscal
incentives and sponsorships arrangements;

procurement or acquisition of fiscal agency or depository services,
liquidation and management services for regulated financial institutions or

- 48 -

(d)
(e)

(f)

Valuation

4.

services related to sale, redemption and distribution of public debt,
including loans and government bonds, notes and other securities;

public employment contracts;
procurement conducted:

(1) for the specific purpose of providing international assistance,
including development aid;

(ii) under a particular procedure or condition of an international
agreement relating to the stationing of troops or relating to the joint
implementation by the signatory countries of a project; or

(ii1) under a particular procedure or condition of an international
organisation, or funded by international grants, loans or other
assistance where the applicable procedure or condition would be
inconsistent with this Chapter;

procurement of a good or service outside the territory of the Party or the
procuring entity, for consumption outside the territory of that Party.

In estimating the value of procurement for the purpose of ascertaining whether it
1s a covered procurement, a procuring entity shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

neither divide a procurement into separate procurements nor use a
particular method for estimating the value of a procurement with the
intention of totally or partially excluding it from the application of this
Chapter;

include the estimated maximum total value of the procurement over its
entire duration, taking into account all forms of remuneration, including
any premiums, fees, commissions, interest and, where the procurement
provides for the possibility of option clauses, the total value of such
options;

for any contract awarded at the same time or over a given period to one or
more suppliers under the same procurement base its calculation of the total
maximum value of the procurement over its entire duration;!? and

where domestic laws and regulations allow for contracts to be concluded
for an indefinite period and a total price is not specified, the basis for
valuation of such contracts shall be based on the estimated monthly
instalment multiplied by 48.

For the EFTA States it is understood that this covers a period of 12 months.

- 49 -

ARTICLE 10.2

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(j)

(k)

(I)

(m)

“commercial goods or services” means goods or services of a type
generally sold or offered for sale in the commercial marketplace to, and
customarily purchased by, non-governmental buyers for non-
governmental purposes;

“construction service” means a service that has as its objective the
realisation by whatever means of civil or building works, as described in
Appendix 6 (Construction Services);

“days” means calendar days;

“electronic auction” means an iterative process that involves the use of
electronic means for the presentation by suppliers of either new prices, or
new values for quantifiable non-price elements of the tender related to the
evaluation criteria, or both, resulting in a ranking or re-ranking of tenders;

“in writing or written” means any worded or numbered expression that can
be read, reproduced, and may be communicated later, including
electronically transmitted and stored information;

“limited tendering” means a procurement method whereby the procuring
entity contacts a supplier or suppliers of its choice;

“measure” means any law, regulation, procedure, administrative guidance
or practice, or any action as determined by a Party, including its procuring
entities, relating to a covered procurement;

“multi-use list” means a list of suppliers that a procuring entity has
determined satisfy the conditions for participation in that list, and that the
procuring entity intends to use more than once;

“notice of intended procurement” means a notice published by a procuring
entity inviting interested suppliers to submit a request for participation, a
tender, or both;

“notice of planned procurement” means a notice published by a procuring
entity regarding its future procurement plans;

“offset” means any condition or undertaking that encourages local
development or improves a Party’s balance-of-payments accounts, such as
the use of domestic content, the licensing of technology, investment,
counter-trade, and similar actions or requirements;

“open tendering” means a procurement method where all interested
suppliers may submit a tender;

“person” means a natural person or a juridical person;

- 50-

(n) “procuring entity” means an entity covered under Appendices 1 to 3
(Entities at Central Government Level, Entities at Sub-Central
Government Level and Other Covered Entities) to Annex XX
(Government Procurement);

(0) “qualified supplier” means a supplier that a procuring entity recognises as
having satisfied the conditions for participation;

(p) “selective tendering” means a procurement method whereby only qualified
suppliers are invited by the procuring entity to submit a tender;

(q) “services” includes construction services, unless otherwise specified;

(r) “standard” means a document approved by a recognised body, that
provides for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines, or characteristics
for goods or services, or related processes and production methods, with
which compliance is not mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively
with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking, or labelling requirements
as they apply to a good, service, process, or production method;

(s) “supplier” means a person or group of persons that provides or could
provide goods or services;

(t) “technical specification” means a tendering requirement that:

(1) lays down the characteristics of goods or services to be procured,
including quality, performance, safety and dimensions, or the
processes and methods for their production or provision; or

(11) addresses terminology, symbols, packaging, marking, or labelling
requirements, as they apply to a good or service.

ARTICLE 10.3

Security and General Exceptions

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from taking any
action or not disclosing any information that it considers necessary for the protection of
its essential security interests relating to the procurement of arms, ammunition, or war
materials, or to procurement indispensable for national security or for national defence
purposes.

2 The Parties understand that paragraph | includes procurement indispensable for
the maintenance or restoration of international peace.

3. Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner that
would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties
where the same conditions prevail or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties,
nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from imposing or enforcing
measures:

(a) necessary to protect public morals, order or safety;

-5]-

(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
(c) necessary to protect intellectual property; or

(d) relating to goods or services of persons with disabilities, philanthropic
institutions, or prison labour.

4. The Parties understand that subparagraph 3 (b) includes environmental measures
necessary to protect human, animal, or plant life or health.

ARTICLE 10.4

National Treatment and Non-Discrimination

1. With respect to any measure regarding covered procurement, each Party,
including its procuring entities, shall accord immediately and unconditionally to the
goods and services of another Party and to the suppliers of another Party offering such
goods or services, treatment no less favourable than the treatment accorded to domestic
goods, services and suppliers. For greater certainty, this obligation refers only to the
treatment accorded by a Party to any good, service or supplier of another Party under this
Agreement.

2. With respect to any measure regarding covered procurement, a Party, including its
procuring entities, shall not:

(a) treat a locally established supplier less favourably than another locally
established supplier on the basis of degree of foreign affiliation or
ownership; or

(b) discriminate against a locally established supplier on the basis that the
goods or services offered by that supplier for a particular procurement are
goods or services of another Party.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to customs duties and charges of any kind
imposed on or in connection with importation, the method of levying such duties and
charges, other import regulations or formalities, and measures affecting trade in services
other than measures governing covered procurement.

ARTICLE 10.5

Use of Electronic Means

l. The Parties shall seek to provide opportunities for covered procurement to be
undertaken through electronic means, including the publication of procurement
information, notices, and tender documentation, and for the receipt of tenders.

2. When conducting covered procurement by electronic means, a procuring entity
shall:

(a) ensure that the procurement is conducted using information technology
systems and software, including those related to authentication and

-52-

encryption of information, that are generally available and interoperable
with other generally available information technology systems and
software; and

(b) maintain mechanisms that ensure the integrity of requests for participation
and tenders, including establishment of the time of receipt and the
prevention of inappropriate access.

ARTICLE 10.6

Conduct of Procurement

A procuring entity shall conduct covered procurement in a transparent and
impartial manner that:

(a) is consistent with this Chapter, using methods such as open tendering,
selective tendering, and limited tendering;

(b) avoids conflicts of interest; and

(c) prevents corrupt practices.

ARTICLE 10.7
Rules of Origin

For the purposes of covered procurement, no Party may apply rules of origin to
goods or services imported from or supplied by another Party that are different from the
rules of origin the Party applies at the same time in the normal course of trade.

ARTICLE 10.8

Offsets

With regard to covered procurement, a Party, including its procuring entities, shall
not seek, take account of, impose or enforce any offset.

ARTICLE 10.9

Information on the Procurement System

1. Each Party shall promptly publish any measure of general application regarding
covered procurement and any modification to this information, in an officially designated
electronic or paper medium that is widely disseminated and remains readily accessible to
the public.

2. Each Party shall list in Appendix 7 (Means of Publication) to Annex XX
(Government Procurement) the paper or the electronic means through which the Party
publishes the information described in paragraph 1 and the notices required by Article

53 -

10.10 (Notices), Article 10.12 (Qualification of Suppliers) and Article 10.22
(Transparency of Procurement Information).

3. Each Party shall, on request, provide to another Party an explanation relating to
such information.

ARTICLE 10.10

Notices

1. For each covered procurement, a procuring entity shall publish a notice of
intended procurement, except in the circumstances referred to in Article 10.17 (Limited
Tendering). The notice shall be published in the electronic or paper medium listed in
Appendix 7 (Means of Publication) to Annex XX (Government Procurement).

2. Such medium shall:

(a) be widely disseminated and the notice shall remain accessible, at least,
until expiration of the time period indicated in the notice or the deadline
for submission of the tender.

b) for procuring entities covered under Appendix 1 (Entities at Central
Government Level) to Annex XX (Government Procurement) be
accessible by electronic means free of charge through a single point of
access; and

(c) for procuring entities covered under Appendices 2 or 3 (Entities at Sub-
Central Government Level and Other Covered Entities) to Annex XX
(Government Procurement), where accessible by electronic means, be
provided, at least through links in a gateway electronic site that is
accessible free of charge.

3. The Parties, including their procuring entities covered under Appendix 2 (Entities
at Sub-Central Government Level) or Appendix 3 (Other Covered Entities) to Annex XX
(Government Procurement), are encouraged to publish their notices by electronic means
free of charge through a single point of access.

4. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, each notice of intended procurement
shall include the following information, unless that information is provided in the tender
documentation that is made available free of charge to all interested suppliers at the same
time as the notice of intended procurement:

(a) the name and address of the procuring entity and other information
necessary to contact the procuring entity and obtain all relevant documents
relating to the procurement, and their cost and terms of payment, if any;

(b) a description of the procurement, including the nature and the quantity of
the goods or services to be procured or, where the quantity is not known,
the estimated quantity;

(c) a description of any options;

-~54-

(d) the timeframe for delivery of goods or services or the duration of the
contract;

(e) the procurement method that will be used and whether it will involve
negotiation or electronic auction;

(f) where applicable, the address and any final date for the submission of
requests for participation in the procurement;

(g) the address and the final date for the submission of tenders;

(h) — the language or languages in which tenders or requests for participation
may be submitted, if they may be submitted in a language other than an
official language of the Party of the procuring entity;

(1) a list and brief description of any conditions for participation of suppliers,
including any requirements for specific documents or certifications to be
provided by suppliers in connection therewith, unless such requirements
are included in tender documentation that is made available to all
interested suppliers at the same time as the notice of intended procurement;

(j) where, pursuant to Article 10.12 (Qualification of Suppliers), a procuring
entity intends to select a limited number of qualified suppliers to be invited
to tender, the criteria that will be used to select them and, where applicable,
any limitation on the number of suppliers that will be permitted to tender;

(k) an estimate, if possible, of the timing of subsequent notices of intended
procurement for any contract awarded at the same time or over a given
period to one or more suppliers under the same procurement; and

(1) an indication that the procurement is covered by this Chapter, unless that
indication is publicly available through information published pursuant to
Article 10.9 (Information on the Procurement System).

5. Procuring entities are encouraged to publish in the appropriate paper or electronic
medium listed in Appendix 7 (Means of Publication) to Annex XX (Government
Procurement), as early as possible in each fiscal year, a notice regarding their future
procurement plans. The notice of planned procurement should include the subject-matter
of the procurement and the planned date of the publication of the notice of intended
procurement.

6. A procuring entity covered under Appendix 2 (Entities at Sub-Central
Government Level) or Appendix 3 (Other Covered Entities) to Annex XX (Government
Procurement) may use a notice of planned procurement as a notice of intended
procurement, provided that the notice of planned procurement includes any information
referred to in paragraph 3 as is available to the entity and a statement that interested
suppliers should express their interest in the procurement to the procuring entity.

-55-

ARTICLE 10.11

Conditions for Participation

1. In establishing the conditions for participation and assessing whether a supplier
satisfies such conditions, a Party, including its procuring entities:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

shall limit any conditions for participation in a covered procurement to
those that are essential to ensure that a supplier has the legal and financial
capacities and the commercial and technical abilities to undertake the
relevant procurement;

shall evaluate the financial capacity and the commercial and technical
abilities of a supplier on the basis of that supplier’s business activities both
inside and outside the territory of the Party of the procuring entity;

shall base its evaluation solely on the conditions that the procuring entity
has specified in advance in notices or tender documentation;

shall not impose the condition that, in order for a supplier to participate in
a procurement, the supplier has previously been awarded one or more
contracts by a procuring entity of a given Party or that the supplier has
prior work experience in the territory of that Party; and

may require relevant prior experience where essential to meet the
requirements of the procurement.

2. Where there is supporting evidence, a Party, including its procuring entities, may
exclude a supplier on grounds such as:

(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)
(e)

(f)

bankruptcy or insolvency;
false declarations;

significant or persistent deficiencies in performance of any substantive
requirement or obligation under a prior contract or contracts;

final judgments in respect of serious crimes or other serious offences;

grave professional misconduct or acts or omissions that adversely reflect
upon the commercial integrity of the supplier; or

failure to pay taxes.

ARTICLE 10.12

Qualification of Suppliers

Registration Systems and Qualification Procedures

1. A Party, including its procuring entities, may maintain a supplier registration
system under which interested suppliers are required to register and provide certain

information.

- 56-

2. No Party, including its procuring entities, shall:

(a) adopt or apply any registration system or qualification procedure with the
purpose or the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to the participation
of suppliers of another Party in its procurement; or

(b) use such registration system or qualification procedure to prevent or delay
the inclusion of suppliers of other Parties on a list of suppliers or prevent
those suppliers from being considered for a particular procurement.

Selective tendering
3. Where a procuring entity intends to use selective tendering, the entity shall:

(a) include in the notice of intended procurement at least the information
specified in subparagraphs 3 (a), 3 (b), 3 (f), 3 (g), 3 (Gj), and 3 (k) of Article
10.10 (Notices) and invite suppliers to submit a request for participation;
and

(b) provide, by the commencement of the time-period for tendering, at least
the information in subparagraphs 3 (d), 3 (e), 3 (h), 3 (1) and 3 (k) of Article
10.10 (Notices) to the qualified suppliers that it notifies as specified in
subparagraph 2 (b) of Appendix 8 (Time Periods) to Annex XX
(Government Procurement).

4. Where using selective tendering, a procuring entity shall allow all qualified
suppliers to participate in a particular procurement, unless the procuring entity states in
the notice of intended procurement any limitation on the number of suppliers that will be
permitted to tender and the criteria for selecting the limited number of suppliers.

5. Where the tender documentation is not made publicly available from the date of
publication of the notice referred to in paragraph 3, a procuring entity shall ensure that
those documents are made available at the same time to all the qualified suppliers selected
in accordance with paragraph 4.

Multi-Use Lists

6. A procuring entity may establish or maintain a multi-use list of suppliers, provided
that a notice inviting interested suppliers to apply for inclusion on the list is published
annually in the appropriate medium listed in Appendix 7 (Means of Publication) to Annex
XX (Government Procurement), or, is made available continuously in the electronic
medium listed in Appendix 7 (Means of Publication) to Annex XX (Government
Procurement). Where a multi-use list will be valid for three years or less, a procuring
entity may publish the notice only once, at the beginning of the period of validity of the
list.

7. The notice provided for in paragraph 6 shall include:

(a) a description of the goods or services, or categories thereof, for which the
list may be used;

-57-

(b) conditions for participation to be satisfied by suppliers for inclusion on the
list and the methods that the procuring entity will use to verify that a
supplier satisfies the conditions;

(c) name and address of the procuring entity and other information necessary
to contact the entity and obtain all relevant documents relating to the list;
and

(d) period of validity of the list and the means for its renewal or termination,
or where the period of validity is not provided, an indication of the method
by which notice will be given of the termination of use of the list.

8. A procuring entity shall allow suppliers to apply at any time for inclusion on a
multi-use list and shall include on that list all qualified suppliers within a reasonably
period of time.

Information on Procuring Entity Decisions

9. A procuring entity or other entity of a Party shall promptly inform any supplier
that submits a request for participation in a procurement or application for inclusion on a
multi-use list of the decision with respect to the request or application.

10. If a procuring entity or other entity of a Party rejects a supplier’s request for
participation or application for inclusion on a multi-use list, ceases to recognise a supplier
as qualified, or removes a supplier from a multi-use list, the entity shall promptly inform
the supplier and on request of the supplier, promptly provide the supplier with a written
explanation of the reason for its decision.

ARTICLE 10.13

Tender Documentation

1. A procuring entity shall make available to suppliers’ tender documentation that
includes all information necessary to permit suppliers to prepare and submit responsive
tenders. Unless already provided for in the notice of intended procurement, such
documentation shall include a complete description of:

(a) the procurement, including the nature and the quantity of the goods or
services to be procured or, where the quantity is not known, the estimated
quantity and any requirements to be fulfilled, including any technical
specifications, conformity assessment certification, plans, drawings or
instructional materials;

(b) any conditions for participation of suppliers, including a list of information
and documents that suppliers are required to submit in connection with the
conditions for participation;

(c) all evaluation criteria the entity will apply in the awarding of the contract,
and, except where price is the sole criterion, the relative importance of
such criteria;

- 58 -

(d) where the procuring entity will conduct the procurement by electronic
means, any authentication and encryption requirements or other
requirements related to the submission of information by electronic means;

(e) where the procuring entity will hold an electronic auction, the rules,
including identification of the elements of the tender related to the
evaluation criteria, on which the auction will be conducted;

(f) where there will be a public opening of tenders, the date, time and place
for the opening and, where appropriate, the persons authorised to be
present;

(g) any other terms or conditions, including terms of payment and any
limitation on the means by which tenders may be submitted, such as
whether on paper or by electronic means; and

(h) any dates for the delivery of goods or the supply of services.

2. Where procuring entities do not offer free direct access to the entire tender
documents and any supporting documents by electronic means, entities shall make
promptly available the tender documentation at the request of any interested supplier of
the Parties. The procuring entities shall also promptly reply to any reasonable request for
relevant information by any interested or participating supplier, provided that such
information does not give that supplier an advantage over other suppliers.

ARTICLE 10.14

Technical Specifications

1. A procuring entity shall not prepare, adopt or apply any technical specification
nor prescribe any conformity assessment procedure with the purpose or the effect of
creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

2. In prescribing the technical specifications for the goods or services being
procured, a procuring entity shall, where appropriate:

(a) set out the technical specification in terms of performance and functional
requirements, rather than design or descriptive characteristics; and

(b) base the technical specification on international standards, where such
exist or otherwise, on national technical regulations, recognised national
standards or building codes.

3. Where design or descriptive characteristics are used in the _ technical
specifications, a procuring entity should indicate, where appropriate, that it will consider
tenders of equivalent goods or services that demonstrably fulfil the requirements of the
procurement by including words such as “or equivalent” in the tender documentation.

4. A procuring entity shall not prescribe any technical specifications that require or
refer to a particular trademark or trade name, patent, copyright, design or type, specific
origin, producer or supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently precise or intelligible
way of describing the procurement requirements and provided that, in such cases, the
entity includes words such as “or equivalent” in the tender documentation.

- 59 -

5. A procuring entity shall not seek or accept, in a manner that would have the effect
of precluding competition, advice that may be used in the preparation or adoption of any
technical specification for a specific procurement from a person that may have a
commercial interest in the procurement.

6. For greater certainty, a Party, including its procuring entities, may, in accordance
with this Article, prepare, adopt or apply technical specifications to promote the
conservation of natural resources or protect the environment.

7. For greater certainty, a procuring entity may conduct market research in
developing specifications for a particular procurement.

8. For greater certainty, this Chapter is not intended to preclude a Party, or its
procuring entities, from preparing, adopting or applying technical specifications required
to protect sensitive government information, including specifications that may affect or
limit the storage, hosting or processing of such information outside the territory of the
Party.

ARTICLE 10.15

Modifications of the Tender Documentation and Technical Specifications

I. Where, prior to the award of a contract, a procuring entity modifies the evaluation
criteria or requirements set out in a notice of intended procurement or tender
documentation provided to participating suppliers, or amends or reissues a notice or
tender documentation, it shall publish or provide those modifications, amended or re-
issued notice or tender documentation:

(a) to all suppliers that are participating at the time of the modification,
amendment or re-issuance, if known, and in all other cases, in the same
manner as the original information was made available; and

(b) | inadequate time to allow such suppliers to modify and re-submit amended
tenders, as appropriate.

ARTICLE 10.16

Time Periods

A procuring entity shall, consistent with its own reasonable needs, provide
suppliers sufficient time to prepare and submit requests for participation and responsive
tenders, taking into account in particular the nature and complexity of the procurement.
Each Party shall apply time periods according to the conditions specified in Appendix 8
(Time Periods) to Annex XX (Government Procurement). Such time periods, including
any extension of the time periods, shall be the same for all interested or participating
suppliers.

- 60 -

ARTICLE 10.18

Limited Tendering

1. Provided that it does not use this provision for the purpose of avoiding competition
among suppliers or in a manner that discriminates against suppliers of another Party or
protects domestic suppliers, a procuring entity may use limited tendering and may choose
not to apply Articles 10.10 (Notices), 10.11 (Conditions for Participation), 10.12
(Qualification of Suppliers), 10.13 (Tender Documentation), 10.16 (Time Periods), 10.18
(Electronic Auctions), 10.19 (Negotiations), 10.20 (Treatment of Tenders) and 10.21
(Awarding of Contracts) only under the following circumstances:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

where:
(1) no tenders were submitted, or no supplier requested participation;

(11) no tenders that conform to the essential requirements of the tender
documentation were submitted;

(111) | no suppliers satisfied the conditions for participation; or

(iv) the tenders submitted have been collusive;

provided that the requirements of the tender documentation are not
substantially modified;

where the goods or services can be supplied only by a particular supplier
and no reasonable alternative or substitute goods or services exist for any
of the following reasons:

(1) the requirement is for a work of art;
(11) — the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive rights; or
(111) | due to an absence of competition for technical reasons;

for additional deliveries by the original supplier or its authorised agents,
of goods and services that were not included in the initial procurement
where a change of supplier for such additional goods and services:

(i) cannot be made for economic or technical reasons such as
requirements of interchangeability or interoperability with existing
equipment, software, services or installations procured under the
initial procurement; and

(11) | would cause significant inconvenience or substantial duplication
of costs to the procuring entity;

insofar as strictly necessary where, for reasons of extreme urgency brought
about by events unforeseeable by the procuring entity, the goods or
services could not be obtained in time using an open or selective tendering
procedure;

for goods purchased on a commodity market;

-61-

(f)

(g)

(h)

where a procuring entity procures a prototype or a first good or service that
is intended for limited trial or that is developed at its request in the course
of, and for, a particular contract for research, experiment, study or original
development. Original development of a first good or service may include
limited production or supply in order to incorporate the results of field
testing and to demonstrate that the good or service is suitable for
production or supply in quantity to acceptable quality standards, but does
not include quantity production or supply to establish commercial viability
or to recover research and development costs. Subsequent procurements
of these newly developed goods or services, however, shall be subject to
this Chapter;

for purchases made under exceptionally advantageous conditions that only
arise in the very short term in the case of unusual disposals such as those
arising from liquidation, receivership, or bankruptcy, but not for routine
purchases from regular suppliers; or

where a contract is awarded to a winner of a design contest provided that:

(i) the contest has been organised in a manner that is consistent with
the principles of this Chapter, in particular relating to the
publication of a notice of intended procurement; and

(11) the participants are judged by an independent jury with a view to a
design contract being awarded to a winner.

2. A procuring entity shall prepare a report in writing on each contract awarded under
paragraph 1. The report shall include the name of the procuring entity, the value and kind
of goods or services procured, and a statement indicating the circumstances and
conditions described in paragraph 1 that justified the use of limited tendering.

ARTICLE 10.18

Electronic Auctions

l. Where a procuring entity intends to conduct a covered procurement using an
electronic auction, the entity shall provide each participant, before commencing the
electronic auction, with:

(a)

(b)

(c)

the automatic evaluation method, including the mathematical formula, that

is based on the evaluation criteria set out in the tender documentation and
that will be used in the automatic ranking or re-ranking during the auction;

the results of any initial evaluation of the elements of its tender where the
contract is to be awarded on the basis of the most advantageous tender;
and

any other relevant information relating to the conduct of the auction.

- 62 -

ARTICLE 10.19

Negotiations

1. A Party may provide for its procuring entities to conduct negotiations in the
context of covered procurement:

(a) where the entity has indicated such intent in the notice of intended
procurement pursuant to Article 10.10 (Notices); or

(b) where it appears from the evaluation that no one tender is obviously the
most advantageous in terms of the specific evaluation criteria set out in
the notice of intended procurement or tender documentation.

2. A procuring entity shall:

(a) ensure that any elimination of suppliers participating in negotiations is
carried out in accordance with the evaluation criteria set out in the notice
of intended procurement or tender documentation; and

(b) where negotiations are concluded, provide a common deadline for the
remaining participating suppliers to submit any new or revised tenders.

ARTICLE 10.20

Treatment of Tenders

1. A procuring entity shall receive, open and treat all tenders under procedures that
guarantee the fairness and impartiality of the procurement process and the confidentiality
of tenders.

2. A procuring entity shall not penalise any supplier whose tender is received after
the time specified for receiving tenders if the delay is due solely to mishandling on the
part of the procuring entity provided that the mishandling is supported by documentation.

3. Where a procuring entity provides suppliers with an opportunity to correct
unintentional errors of form between the opening of tenders and the awarding of the
contract, the entity shall provide the same opportunity to all participating suppliers.

ARTICLE 10.21

Awarding of Contracts

1. To be considered for award, a tender shall be submitted in writing and shall, at the
time of opening, comply with the essential requirements set out in the notices and tender
documentation and be submitted by a supplier that satisfies the conditions for
participation.

2. Unless a procuring entity determines that it is not in the public interest to award a
contract, the entity shall award the contract to the supplier that it has determined to be

- 63 -

capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract and that, based solely on the evaluation
criteria specified in the notices and tender documentation, has submitted:

(a) the most advantageous tender; or
(b) where price is the sole criterion, the lowest price.

3. Where a procuring entity receives a tender with a price that is abnormally lower
than the prices in other tenders submitted, it may verify with the supplier that it satisfies
the conditions for participation and is capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract.

4. A procuring entity shall not use option clauses, cancel a procurement or modify
or terminate awarded contracts in a manner that circumvents the obligations of this
Chapter.

ARTICLE 10.22

Transparency of Procurement Information

1. A procuring entity shall promptly inform participating suppliers of its contract
award decisions and, on request, shall do so in writing. Subject to Article 10.23
(Disclosure of Information), a procuring entity shall, on request, provide an unsuccessful
supplier with an explanation of the reasons why the entity did not select its tender and the
relative advantages of the successful supplier’s tender.

2. No later than 72 days from the award of each contract for covered procurement, a
procuring entity shall publish in a paper or electronic medium listed in Appendix 7
(Means of Publication) to Annex XX (Government Procurement), a notice that includes
at least the following information about the contract:

(a) a description of the goods or services procured;
(b) — the name and address of the procuring entity;
(c) the name and address of the successful supplier;

(d) the value of the successful tender or the highest and lowest offers taken
into account in the award of the contract;

(e) the date of award; and

(f) the type of procurement method used, and in cases where limited tendering
was used pursuant to Article 10.17 (Limited Tendering), a description of
the circumstances justifying the use of limited tendering.

Where the entity publishes the notice only in an electronic medium, the information shall
remain readily accessible for a reasonable period of time.

3. Each procuring entity shall, for a period of at least three years from the date it
awards a contract, maintain the documentation and reports of tendering procedures and
contract awards relating to covered procurement, including the reports provided for in
Article 10.17 (Limited Tendering), and to ensure the appropriate traceability of the
conduct of covered procurement by electronic means.

- 64 -

ARTICLE 10.23

Disclosure of Information

1. On request of another Party, a Party shall provide promptly any information
sufficient to determine whether a procurement was conducted fairly, impartially and in
accordance with this Chapter, including information on the characteristics and relative
advantages of the successful tender.

2. In cases where the release of such information would prejudice competition in
future tenders, the Party that receives the information shall not disclose it to any supplier,
except after consulting with, and obtaining the agreement of, the Party that provided the
information.

3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a Party, including its
procuring entities, shall not, except to the extent required by law or with the written
authorisation of the supplier that provided information, disclose information to a
particular supplier that might prejudice fair competition between suppliers.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party, including its
procuring entities, authorities, and review bodies, to release confidential information
under this Chapter where disclosure:

(a) would impede law enforcement;
(b) might prejudice fair competition between suppliers;

(c) would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular persons,
including the protection of intellectual property; or

(d) would otherwise be contrary to the public interest.

ARTICLE 10.24

Domestic Review Procedures for Supplier Challenges

1. Each Party shall maintain, establish or designate at least one impartial
administrative or judicial authority (review authority) that is independent of its procuring
entities to review, in a non-discriminatory, timely, transparent and effective manner, a
challenge or complaint (complaint) by a supplier that there has been:

(a) breaches of this Chapter; or

(b) if the supplier does not have a right to directly challenge a breach of this
Chapter under the law of a Party, a failure of a procuring entity to comply
with the Party’s measures implementing this Chapter,

arising in the context of a covered procurement, in which the supplier has, or has had, an
interest. The procedural rules for all complaints shall be in writing and made generally
available.

2. In the event of a complaint by a supplier, arising in the context of covered
procurement in which the supplier has, or has had, an interest, that there has been a breach
or a failure as referred to in paragraph 1, the Party of the procuring entity shall encourage

- 65 -

that entity and the supplier to seek resolution of the complaint through consultations. The
entity shall accord impartial and timely consideration to the complaint in a manner that is
not prejudicial to the supplier’s participation in ongoing or future procurement or its right
to seek corrective measures under the administrative or judicial review procedure. Each
Party shall make information on its complaint mechanisms generally available.

3. Each supplier shall be allowed a sufficient time period to prepare and submit a
complaint, which in no case shall be less than ten days from the time when the basis of
the complaint became known or reasonably should have become known to the supplier.

4. Where a body other than the review authority initially reviews a complaint, the
Party shall ensure that the supplier may appeal the initial decision to the review authority
that is independent of the procuring entity whose procurement is the subject of the
complaint.

5. Each Party shall ensure that the review authority that is not a court shall either
have its decisions subject to judicial review or have procedures that provide that:

(a) the procuring entity shall respond in writing to the complaint and disclose
all relevant documents to the review authority;

(b) a supplier that initiates a complaint shall be provided an opportunity to
reply to the procuring entity’s response before the review authority takes a
decision on the complaint; and

(c) the review authority shall make its decisions or recommendations in a
timely fashion, in writing, and shall include an explanation of the basis for
each decision or recommendation.

6. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that provide for:

(a) rapid interim measures, pending the resolution of a complaint, to preserve
the supplier’s opportunity to participate in the procurement. Such interim
measures may result in the suspension of the procurement process. The
procedures may provide that overriding adverse consequences for the
interests concerned, including the public interest, may be taken into
account when deciding whether such measures should be applied. Just
cause for not acting shall be provided in writing; and

(b) where a review body has determined that there has been a breach of this
Chapter or a failure as referred to in paragraph 1, corrective action or
compensation for the loss or damages suffered, which may be limited to
either the costs reasonably incurred for the preparation of the tender or the
costs relating to the complaint, or both.

ARTICLE 10.25

Modifications and Rectifications to Coverage

1. A Party may make rectifications of a purely formal nature to its coverage under
this Chapter, or minor amendments to its Schedules in Annex XX (Government
Procurement), provided that it notifies the other Parties in writing and no Party objects in

- 66 -

writing within 45 days following the date of the circulation of the notification. A Party
that makes such a rectification or minor amendment need not provide compensatory
adjustments to the other Parties.

2. For the purposes of this Article, rectifications of a purely formal nature and
minor modifications include, but are not limited to:

(a) changes in the name of a procuring entity;
(b) — the merger of one or more procuring entities listed in a Party’s schedule;

(c) the separation of a procuring entity listed in a Party’s schedule into two
or more procuring entities that are all added to the procuring entities
listed in the same section of the annex; and

(d) changes in website references.

3. A Party may otherwise modify its coverage under this Chapter provided that:

(a) it notifies the other Parties in writing and offers at the same time acceptable
compensatory adjustments to maintain a level of coverage comparable to
that existing prior to the modification, except where provided for in
paragraph 4; and

(b) no Party objects in writing within 45 days following the date of the
circulation of the notification.

4. A Party is not required to provide compensatory adjustments where the Parties
agree that the proposed modification covers a procuring entity over which a Party has
effectively eliminated its control or influence. If a Party objects to the assertion that such
government control or influence has been effectively eliminated, the objecting Party may
request further information or consultations with a view to clarifying the nature of any
government control or influence and reaching agreement on the procuring entity’s
continued coverage under this Chapter.

5. If the modifying Party and any objecting Party resolve the objection through
consultations, the modifying Party shall notify the other Parties of the resolution.

6. The Joint Committee shall modify Annex XX (Government Procurement) to
reflect any agreed modification.

ARTICLE 10.26

Ensuring Integrity in Procurement Practices

Each Party shall ensure that criminal or administrative measures exist to address
corruption in its government procurement. These measures may include procedures to
render ineligible for participation in the Party’s procurements, either indefinitely or for a
stated time period, suppliers that the Party has determined to have engaged in fraudulent

-67-

or other illegal actions in relation to government procurement in the Party’s territory. Each
Party shall also ensure that it has in place policies and procedures to eliminate to the
extent possible or manage any potential conflict of interest on the part of those engaged
in or having influence over a procurement.

ARTICLE 10.27

Small and Medium Enterprises Participation

1. The Parties recognise the importance of the participation of small and medium
enterprises (SMEs) in government procurement. The Parties also recognise the
importance of business alliances between suppliers of each Party, and in particular of
SMEs.

2. The Parties may agree to work jointly towards exchanging information on
facilitating SMEs access to government procurement procedures, methods and
contracting requirements, focused on SMEs special needs.

ARTICLE 10.28

Cooperation

1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation with a view to achieving a
better understanding of their respective government procurement systems, as well as a
better access to their respective markets.

2. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in matters of mutual interest such as:

(a) technical assistance and capacity building in relation to the implementation
of this Chapter;

(b) development and use of electronic communications in government
procurement systems;

(c) facilitating participation by suppliers in government procurement, in
particular, with respect to SMEs;

(d) enhancing the ability to provide multilingual access to procurement
opportunities; and

(e) exchange of experiences and information, such as regulatory frameworks,
best practices and statistics.

ARTICLE 10.29

Contact Points

Each Party shall, within 30 days from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement for that Party, designate one or more contact points to facilitate

- 68 -

communication pertaining to the implementation of this Chapter and notify the other
Parties of the relevant details of that contact point or those contact points. Each Party
shall promptly notify the other Parties of any change regarding the relevant details of its
contact point or contact points.

ARTICLE 10.30

Review

The Parties shall undertake a review of this Chapter five years after the date of
entry into force of this Agreement, with a view to improving the coverage, as mutually
agreed by the Parties, and at least every three and a half years thereafter, unless otherwise
agreed by the Parties.

ARTICLE 10.31
Transitional Measures
1. With a view to facilitate the implementation of this Chapter, Malaysia may, with
the agreement of the other Parties:
(a) adopt or maintain transitional measures during a transition period; or;

(b) delay the implementation of any obligation of this Chapter,

as set out in, and in accordance with, Appendix 11 (Transitional Measures) to Annex XX
(Government Procurement).

2. A transitional measure shall be applied in a transparent manner that does not
discriminate between the Parties.

3. After the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties, on request of
Malaysia, may:

(a) extend the transition period for a measure adopted or maintained under
paragraph | (a) or any implementation period negotiated under paragraph
1 (b); or

(b) approve the adoption of a new transitional measure under paragraph 1, in
special circumstances that were unforeseen.

4. Malaysia shall take those steps during the transition period or implementation
period referred to paragraphs | and 3 that may be necessary to ensure that it complies
with this Chapter at the end of any such period.

- 69 -

CHAPTER 11

COMPETITION

ARTICLE 11.1

General Principles

1. The Parties recognise the importance of undistorted competition and _ that
anticompetitive activities may undermine the benefits of this Agreement.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, “anticompetitive activities” means:

(a) agreements between enterprises, decisions by associations of enterprises
and concerted practices between enterprises which have as their object or
effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition; and

(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territory
of a Party as a whole or in a substantial part thereof.

3. Each Party shall take appropriate action against anticompetitive activities by
applying its respective domestic competition laws and regulations in conformity with the
principles of transparency, non-discrimination and procedural fairness.

4. This Chapter shall not be construed to create any direct obligations for

undertakings.

ARTICLE 11.2
Scope

I. This Chapter shall apply to the commercial activities of all undertakings in so far
as the application of these provisions does not obstruct the performance, in law or in fact,
of particular public tasks assigned to them.

2. This Chapter shall not prevent a Party from providing exemptions and exclusions
from application of its domestic competition laws and regulations, provided that those
exemptions and exclusions are based on public policy grounds or public interest grounds,
and made transparent. On request, a Party shall make available to another Party public
information concerning such exemption.

ARTICLE 11.3

Cooperation

1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation to promote effective
competition enforcement.

-70-

2. The Parties may cooperate and exchange information relating to competition
matters, subject to their respective domestic laws and regulations and available resources.

ARTICLE 11.4

Consultations

The Parties may request consultations in the Joint Committee on matters related
to anticompetitive practices and their adverse effects on trade. The consultations shall be
without prejudice to the autonomy of each Party to develop, maintain and enforce its
domestic competition laws and regulations.

ARTICLE 11.5

Dispute Settlement

No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 15 (Dispute
Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.

-71-

CHAPTER 12

TRADE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

ARTICLE 12.1

Context and Objectives

1. The Parties recall the Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment of 1972, the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development of 1992,
Agenda 21 on Environment and Development of 1992, the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation on Sustainable Development of 2002, the Rio+t20 Outcome Document
“The Future We Want” of 2012, the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and
Rights at Work and its Follow-up of 1998, the ILO Centenary Declaration for the Future
of Work of 2019, the Ministerial Declaration of the UN Economic and Social Council on
Full and Productive Employment and Decent Work for All of 2006, the ILO Declaration
on Social Justice for a Fair Globalisation of 2008 and the outcome document of the UN
Summit on the Sustainable Development Goals “Transforming our World: The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development” of 2015.

2. The Parties recognise that economic development, social development and
environmental protection are interdependent and mutually supportive components of
sustainable development. The Parties underline the benefit of cooperation on trade related
labour and environmental issues as part of a global approach to trade and sustainable
development.

3. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to promote the development of
international trade in such a way as to contribute to the objective of sustainable
development and to ensure that this objective is integrated and reflected in the Parties’
trade relationship.

ARTICLE 12.2
Scope

Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, this Chapter applies to
measures”’ adopted or maintained by the Parties affecting trade-related and investment-
related aspects of labour and environmental issues.

20 For the purposes of this Chapter, for Malaysia measures refers to “environmental laws” that are

an Act of Parliament or regulation promulgated pursuant to an Act of Parliament that are enforceable by
action of the Federal Government.

-72-

ARTICLE 12.3

Right to Regulate and Levels of Protection

1. Recognising the right of each Party to establish its own level of environmental
and labour protection, and to adopt or modify accordingly its relevant domestic laws,
policies and practices, each Party shall endeavour to ensure that its domestic laws, policies
and practices provide for and encourage high levels of environmental and labour
protection, consistent with standards, principles and agreements referred to in Articles
12.5 (International Labour Standards and Agreements) and 12.6 (Multilateral
Environmental Agreements and Environmental Principles), and to further improve the
level of protection provided for in those domestic laws, policies and practices.

2. The Parties recognise the importance, when preparing and implementing
measures related to the environment and labour conditions that affect trade and
investment between them, of taking account of scientific, technical and other information,
and relevant international standards, guidelines and recommendations.

ARTICLE 12.4

Upholding Levels of Protection in the Application and Enforcement of Laws,
Regulations or Standards

1. A Party shall not fail to effectively enforce its environmental and labour laws,
regulations or standards through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction in a
manner affecting trade or investment between the Parties.

2. Without prejudice to each Party’s right to establish its own levels of
environmental and labour protection, and to adopt or modify accordingly its relevant
domestic laws, policies and practices, a Party shall not:

(a) weaken or reduce the level of environmental or labour protection provided
by its domestic laws, regulations or standards with the sole intention to
encourage investment from another Party or to seek or to enhance a
competitive trade advantage of producers or service providers operating in
its territory; or

(b) waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or otherwise derogate
from, such domestic laws, regulations or standards with the sole intention
to encourage investment from another Party or to seek or to enhance a
competitive trade advantage of producers or service providers operating in
its territory.

ARTICLE 12.5

International Labour Standards and Agreements

l. The Parties strive to attain full and productive employment and decent work for
all as a foundation for sustainable development.

-73-

2. The Parties recall the obligations deriving from membership of the ILO in respect
of the fundamental principles and rights at work as reflected in the ILO Declaration on
Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work of 1998, as amended in 2022. Each Party
commits to respect, promote and realise the principles concerning the fundamental rights,
namely:

(a) freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to
collective bargaining;

(b) the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour;
(c) the effective abolition of child labour;

(d) the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and
occupation; and

(e) a safe and healthy working environment.

3. The Parties shall effectively implement the ILO Conventions which they have
ratified, and make continued and sustained efforts towards ratifying the fundamental and
other ILO Conventions that are classified as “up-to-date” by the ILO, taking into account
their domestic circumstances.”!

4. The Parties recognise the importance of the strategic objectives of the ILO Decent
Work Agenda, as reflected in the Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalisation
of 2008, as amended in 2022.

5. The Parties shall:

(a) develop and enhance measures for social protection and decent working
conditions for all, including with regard to social security, occupational
safety and health, wages and earnings, working time and other conditions
of work;

(b) — promote social dialogue and tripartism; and
(c) build and maintain a well-functioning labour inspection system.

6. Each Party shall ensure that persons with a recognised interest under its law in a
particular matter have appropriate access to administrative and judicial proceedings for
the enforcement of the Party’s labour laws.

7. The violation of fundamental principles and rights at work shall not be invoked or
otherwise used as a legitimate comparative advantage and that labour standards shall not
be used for protectionist trade purposes.

21 This paragraph only applies to the Parties that are ILO members.

74 -

ARTICLE 12.6

Multilateral Environmental Agreements and Environmental Principles

Each Party reaffirms its commitment to the effective implementation in its laws
and practices of the multilateral environmental agreements to which it is a party, and to
recognise and respect environmental principles reflected in the international instruments
referred to in Article 12.1 (Context and Objectives).

ARTICLE 12.7

Promotion of Trade and Investment Favouring Sustainable Development

l. The Parties shall strive to facilitate and promote foreign investment, trade in and
dissemination of goods and services beneficial to the environment, including
environmental technologies, sustainable renewable energy, energy efficient and
ecolabelled goods and services.

2. The Parties shall strive to facilitate and promote foreign investment, trade in and
dissemination of goods and services that contribute to sustainable development, including
goods and services that are the subject of schemes such as fair and ethical trade.

3. To this end, the Parties agree to exchange views and may consider, jointly or
bilaterally, cooperation in this area.

4. The Parties shall encourage cooperation between enterprises in relation to goods,
services and technologies that contribute to sustainable development and are beneficial to
the environment.

ARTICLE 12.8

Women’s Economic Empowerment and Trade

I. The Parties recognise that women’s participation in international trade can
contribute to advancing women’s economic empowerment and economic independence
and that enhancing their participation in national and international economies contribute
to sustainable economic development.

2. The Parties reaffirm the commitments made in the Joint Declaration on Trade and
Women’s Economic Empowerment at the WTO Ministerial Conference in Buenos Aires
in December 2017.

3. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to implement in their laws, policies and
practices the international agreements pertaining to equality of opportunity or non-
discrimination to which they are a party, in particular their provisions related to
eliminating discrimination against women in the economy and in the field of employment.

-75-

I.

2.

I.

2.

ARTICLE 12.9

Sustainable Forest Management and Associated Trade

The Parties recognise the importance of effective forest law and governance in
order to ensure sustainable forest management and thereby contribute to the reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions and biodiversity loss resulting from deforestation and
degradation of natural forest and peat swamp forest.

With the aim of contributing to sustainable forest management, the Parties commit
to promote trade in goods that derive from sustainably managed forests. To this end, the
Parties undertake to, inter alia:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

promote the effective use of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) with regard to
endangered timber species;

promote the development and use of certification schemes for forest goods
from sustainably managed forests;

combat illegal logging by improving forest law enforcement and
governance and by ensuring that only legally sourced timber is traded
among the Parties; and

cooperate on issues pertaining to sustainable forest management in the
relevant multilateral fora in which they participate, such as the United

Nations collaborative initiative on Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries (REDD+).

ARTICLE 12.10

Trade and Climate Change

The Parties recognise the importance of pursuing the objectives and principles of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris
Agreement in order to address the urgent threat of climate change and the role of trade
and investment in pursuing these objectives.

Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party commits to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

effectively implement its respective commitments under the UNFCCC and
the Paris Agreement;

promote the contribution of trade and investment to the transition to a low-
carbon-economy and to climate-resilient development; and

cooperate bilaterally, regionally and in international fora as appropriate on
trade-related climate change matters.

-76-

ARTICLE 12.11

Trade and Biological Diversity

1. The Parties recognise the importance of pursuing the objectives of the Convention
on Biological Diversity (CBD) and CITES, and the role of trade in achieving these
objectives.
2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, the Parties commit to:
(a) adopt, maintain and implement laws, regulations and any other measures
to fulfil its obligations under CITES;
(b) implement effective measures to combat transnational organised wildlife
crime throughout the entire value chain;
(c) enhance efforts to assess, address and minimise, the risk and adverse
impact of invasive alien species; and
(d) cooperate, where applicable, on matters concerning trade and the

conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, including
initiatives to reduce demand for illegal wildlife goods.

ARTICLE 12.12

Sustainable Management of Vegetable Oils Sector and Associated Trade

1. The Parties recognise the need to take into account the economic, environmental
and social opportunities and challenges associated with the production of vegetable oils
and that trade between them can play an important role in promoting sustainable
development, management and operation of the vegetable oils sector.

2. Accordingly, the Parties commit to:

(a)

effectively implement and enforce applicable laws, policies and practices
aiming at ensuring management and operation of the vegetable oils sector
in an economically, environmentally and socially beneficial manner;

(b) support the dissemination and use of sustainability certifications schemes
practices and guidelines for sustainably produced vegetable oils and work
towards making them accessible to all producers including smallholders;

(c) cooperate on improving and strengthening national standards related to the
vegetable oils sector where applicable;

(d) ensure transparency of domestic policies measures pertaining to the
vegetable oils sector.

3. For the palm oil sector, the Parties commit to effectively implement and enforce

applicable laws, policies and practices aiming at:

-77-

(a) protecting forests, peatlands, and related ecosystems, in particular those
of high carbon stock and high conservation value, halting deforestation,
peat drainage and fire clearing in land preparation, reducing soil
degradation, air and water pollution; and

(b) respecting the rights of workers, including migrant workers, as well as the
rights of indigenous peoples and local communities, which includes
ensuring the participatory, informed, non-coercive consultation and
negotiations between organisations, local communities, and indigenous
people prior to developments on their customary lands.

4. The Parties shall ensure that palm oil and its derivatives traded between the Parties
are produced in accordance with the sustainability commitments referred to in paragraph
3.

ARTICLE 12.13

Responsible Business Conduct

Each Party shall promote responsible business conduct, by encouraging relevant
practices, such as responsible management of supply chains by businesses. In this regard,
the Parties acknowledge the importance of internationally recognised principles and
guidelines’, that have been endorsed or are supported by that Party.

ARTICLE 12.14

Cooperation on Trade and Sustainable Development

1. The Parties may, subject to national priorities, circumstances and available
resources, cooperate on trade and investment related labour and environmental issues of
mutual interest referred to in this Chapter bilaterally as well as in the international fora in
which they participate.

2. Each Party may, as appropriate, invite the participation of relevant stakeholders

in identifying possible areas of cooperation.

ARTICLE 12.15

Implementation and General Principles

1. The Parties shall designate the administrative entities which shall serve as contact
point(s) for the purpose of implementing this Chapter.

22 Examples of such internationally recognised principles and guidelines are the OECD Guidelines

for Multinational Enterprises on Responsible Business Conduct, the ILO Tripartite Declaration of
Principles concerning Multinational Enterprises and Social Policy, the UN Global Compact and the UN
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.

- 78 -

2. Each Party may request consultations at the technical level regarding any matter
arising under this Chapter. The Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually
satisfactory resolution of the matter.

3. If a Party considers that a problem persists after consultations in accordance with
paragraph 2 have taken place, it may request consultations in the Joint Committee with a
view to facilitating a resolution of the matter.

4. With regard to paragraphs 2 and 3, the Parties concerned may agree to seek advice
from relevant international organisations or bodies.

5. The Parties may at any time agree to good offices, conciliation and mediation
procedures. Such procedures may begin and be terminated at any time. Proceedings
involving good offices, conciliation and mediation, shall be confidential and without
prejudice to the rights of the Parties involved in any other procedures provided for in this
Chapter. If the Parties involved so agree, good offices, conciliation and mediation
procedures may continue while other proceedings referred to in Articles 12.16
(Consultations) and 12.17 (Panel of Experts) are in progress.

6. No Party shall have recourse to Chapter 15 (Dispute Settlement) of this Agreement
for matters arising under this Chapter.

7. The Parties shall provide their stakeholders with the opportunity to share
comments and make recommendations regarding the implementation of this Chapter.

ARTICLE 12.16

Consultations

1. A Party (the requesting Party) may request in writing consultations with another
Party (the responding Party) regarding any matter arising under this Chapter. Such a
request shall be submitted to the responding Party’s contact point referred to in Article
12.15 (Implementation and General Principles). The request shall set out the reasons for
requesting consultations, including sufficient information to enable a full examination of
the matter to identify the provisions of this Chapter considered to be applicable, to enable
the responding Party to respond. The requesting Party shall simultaneously provide a
copy of the notification to the other Parties through the contact points referred to in Article
12.15 (Implementation and General Principles).

2. The responding Party shall reply to the request within 20 days from the date of
receipt. If the parties making and receiving the request for consultation agree, the
consultations may take place in the Joint Committee.

3. Whenever a Party, other than the consulting Parties, considers that it has
substantial interest in the matter under consultation, such a Party may notify the
consulting Parties no later than 14 days after the date of receipt of the copy of the request
for consultations referred to in paragraph 2, of its desire to be joined in the consultations.
The notifying Party shall simultaneously provide a copy of the notification to the other
Parties. The notifying Party shall include in its notice an explanation of its substantial
interest in the matter under consultation.

-79 -

4. Consultations may be held in person or by any technological means available to
the consulting Parties. Consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the
rights of any Party in any other proceedings.

5. Consultations shall commence within 45 days from the date of receipt of the
request for consultations.

6. The consulting Parties shall provide sufficient information to enable a full
examination of whether the measure is inconsistent with this Chapter and treat as
confidential any information designated as such by the Party providing the information.

7. The Parties involved in the consultations may agree to seek advice from experts
or bodies they deem appropriate to assist them in the consultations.

8. The consulting Parties shall inform the other Parties of any mutually agreed
resolution of the matter. Any mutually agreed resolution shall be made publicly available,
unless the consulting Parties agree otherwise.

9. Consultations shall be deemed terminated no later than 150 days from the date of
receipt of the request for consultations pursuant to paragraph | unless otherwise agreed
by the consulting Parties.

ARTICLE 12.17

Panel of Experts

l. If the Parties concerned fail to reach a mutually satisfactory resolution of a matter
arising under this Chapter through consultations in accordance with Article 12.16
(Consultations): the requesting Party may request the establishment of a panel of experts
by means of a written request to the responding Party, if:

(a) the Party to which the request is made does not reply within 20 days in
accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 12.16 (Consultations).

(b) the Party to which the request is made does not enter into consultations
within 45 days from the date of receipt of the request for consultations in
accordance with paragraph 5 of Article 12.16 (Consultations).

(c) the consultations referred to in Article 12.16 (Consultations) fail to settle a
dispute within 150 days from the date of receipt of the request for
consultations by the responding Party.

2. The request for the establishment of a panel of expert made pursuant to paragraph
1 shall identify the specific measure at issue and provide a brief summary of the legal and
factual basis of the complaint sufficient to present the problem clearly. A copy of this
request shall be communicated to the other Parties.

3. Unless the Parties concerned otherwise agree within 20 days from the receipt of

the request for the establishment of the panel of experts, the terms of reference for the
panel of experts shall be:

- 80 -

"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Chapter, the
matter referred to in the request for the establishment of a panel of
experts and issue a written report, to make findings of law and fact
together with the reasons, as well as recommendations, if any, for the
resolution of the matter.”

4. The recommendations of the panel of experts cannot add to or diminish the rights
and obligations of the Parties concerned provided in this Agreement.

5. The panel of experts shall consist of three members. The requesting Party shall
appoint one panellist. Within 30 days of the date of the receipt of the request, the
responding Party to which it was addressed shall appoint another panellist.

6. The Parties concerned shall designate by common agreement the third panellist
who shall chair the panel of experts. If the Parties concerned have not reached the
agreement on the third panellist within 30 days from the appointment of the second
panellist, the two panellists appointed in accordance with paragraph 5 shall, within 15
days, designate the third panellist. If any panellist of the panel of experts has not been
appointed within 75 days of receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 1, either party
concerned may request the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration (
“PCA”’) to make the necessary appointments. In the event where the Secretary-General
of the PCA is not able to appoint the third expert panellist or is a national or permanent
resident of a party concerned, any party concerned may request the Deputy Secretary-
General of the PCA or the next person in line who is not a national or permanent resident
of a party concerned to make the necessary appointments.

7. The panellists shall have relevant expertise, including in international trade law
and international labour law or environmental law. They shall be independent, serve in
their individual capacities and shall not take instructions from any organisation or
government with regard to issues related to the disagreement, or be affiliated with the
government of a Party.

8. The date of establishment of the panel of experts shall be the date on which the
chair is appointed.

9. The chair of the panel of experts shall not be a national, permanent resident nor
have his or her usual place of residence in a party to the matter.

10. Any panellist may be challenged if circumstances give rise to justifiable doubts
as to the panellist’s impartiality, or independence. If a Party concerned does not agree
with the challenge or the challenged panellist does not withdraw, the party making the
challenge may request the Secretary-General of the PCA to decide on the challenge. If
the Secretary-General is unable to act or is a national or permanent resident of a
concerned, the party making the challenge may request the Deputy Secretary-General of
the PCA or the next person in line who is not a national or permanent resident of a Party
concerned to make a decision on the challenge.

11. If a panellist resigns, is removed or becomes unable to act, a successor shall be
appointed in the same manner as prescribed for the appointment of that original panellist.
The work of the panel of experts shall be suspended pending appointment of the
successor.

-81-

12. Where more than one Party requests the establishment of a panel of experts
relating to the same matter or where the request involves more than one responding Party,
and whenever feasible, a single panel of experts should be established to examine requests
relating to the same matter.

13. A Party which is not involved in the matter shall be entitled, on delivery of a
written notice to the Parties concerned, to make written submissions to the panel of
experts, receive written submissions, including annexes, from the Parties concerned,
attend hearings and make oral statements.

14. Unless the Parties concerned agree otherwise, the Panel of Experts shall adopt its
rules of procedures within 30 days of its establishment.

15. The panel of experts shall examine the matter referred to it in the request for the
establishment of a panel of experts in the light of the relevant provisions of this Chapter
which the panel of experts shall interpret in accordance with customary rules of
interpretation of public international law.

16. The hearings of the panel of experts shall be confidential.

17. There shall be no ex parte communications with the panel of experts concerning
matters under its consideration.

18. The panel of experts may hire up to three assistants, unless otherwise required by
the panel of experts or agreed by the Parties concerned.

19. All information or documents submitted by a Party concerned to the panel of
experts, shall, at the same time as it is submitted to the panel of experts, be transmitted
by that party to the other party concerned.

20. The Parties and the panel of experts shall treat as confidential information and
documents submitted to the panel of experts which has been designated as confidential
by the submitting Party. Any Party may make public statements as to its own position or
submissions regarding the matter.

21. The panel of experts may seek information or advice from relevant international
organisations or bodies. Any information obtained shall be submitted to the Parties
concerned for their comments.

22. The deliberations of the panel of experts shall be kept confidential. The panel of
experts shall take its decisions by consensus. In the event where the panel of experts is
unable to reach a consensus, it may take its decisions by majority vote. Any member may
furnish separate opinions on matters not unanimously agreed. The panel of experts shall
not disclose which members are associated with majority or minority opinions. The
reports of the panel of experts shall be drafted without the presence of the Parties
concerned.

23. The panel of experts shall submit an initial report containing its findings and
recommendations to the Parties concerned within 90 days from the date of establishment
of the panel of experts. A Party concerned may submit written comments to the panel of
experts on its initial report within 14 days from the date of receipt of the report. After
considering any such written comments, the panel of experts may modify the initial report
and make any further examination it considers appropriate. The panel of experts shall
present to the Parties concerned a final report within 30 days from the date of receipt of
the initial report. The final report shall be made public.

- 82 -

24. The Parties concerned shall discuss appropriate measures and come to a mutually
acceptable solution to implement the recommendation of the panel of experts contained
in the Final Report. Such measures shall be communicated to the other Parties within
three months from the date of issuance of the final report and shall be monitored by the
Joint Committee.

25. The recommendations in the final report by the panel of experts do not prejudice
the rights of the Party concerned in implementing the appropriate measures to remedy the
matter.

26. Any time period for the purposes of this Article may be modified by mutual
agreement of the Parties concerned.

27. When a panel of experts considers that it cannot comply with a timeframe imposed
on it for the purposes of this Article, it shall inform the Parties concerned in writing and
provide an estimate of the additional time required. Any additional time should not exceed
30 days.

28. The Parties concerned may agree that a panel of experts suspends its work at any
time for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date of such agreement. In the event
of such a suspension, the timeframes regarding the work of the panel of experts shall be
extended by the amount of time that the work was suspended. If the work of a panel of
experts has been suspended for more than 12 months, the authority for the establishment
of the panel of experts shall lapse unless the Parties concerned agree otherwise. This shall
not prejudice the rights of the requesting Party to request at a later stage, the establishment
of a panel of experts on the same matter.

29. The requesting Party may withdraw its request for the establishment of a panel of
experts at any time before the initial report has been issued. Such withdrawal is without
prejudice to its right to introduce a new request for the establishment of a panel of experts
regarding the same issue at a later point in time, no earlier than 12 months from the date
of withdrawal.

30. The Parties concerned may agree to terminate the proceedings of the panel of
experts by jointly so notifying the chair of the panel of experts at any time before the
issuance of the final report to the Parties concerned.

ARTICLE 12.18

Review

The Parties shall periodically review, in the Joint Committee, progress achieved
in pursuing the objectives set out in this Chapter, and consider relevant international
developments to identify areas where further action could promote these objectives.

- §3-

CHAPTER 13

COOPERATION AND CAPACITY BUILDING

ARTICLE 13.1

Objectives and Principles

1. This Chapter sets out a framework to facilitate and coordinate cooperation and
capacity building relevant to this Agreement for the benefit of the Parties in accordance
with their laws, regulations and policies.

2. The Parties declare their readiness to foster trade and economic cooperation in
order to facilitate the implementation of the overall objectives of this Agreement, in
particular to enhance trade and investment opportunities arising from this Agreement and
to contribute to sustainable development.

3. The Parties also recognise that the involvement of the private sector, including
SMEs, plays an important role in enhancing the trade and investment opportunities arising
from this Agreement.

ARTICLE 13.2
Scope

I. Cooperation may cover any fields jointly identified by the Parties that may serve
to enhance the Parties’ and their economic operators’ capacities to benefit from increased
international trade and investment opportunities arising from this Agreement.

2. Cooperation may include trade and investment related aspects of activities such
as:

(a) promotion and facilitation of exports of goods and services to the other
Parties, and promotion of market opportunities;

(b) activities to facilitate the participation of SMEs in international trade and
investment;

(c) customs and origin matters, including vocational training in the customs
field;

(d) technical regulations and sanitary and phytosanitary measures, including
standardisation and certification;

(e) regulatory assistance in areas such as intellectual property rights and
public procurement;

- 84 -

(f) investment, trade and industry related aspects of sustainable development
including promotion of a resource efficient, circular and green economy
and labour and employment issues;

(g) sustainable agriculture and food systems;

(h) engineering, science, technology and innovation;

(1) green mobility and transport;

(j) digitalisation and automation;

(k) pharmaceuticals and medical devices; and

(1) any other areas of cooperation mutually agreed by the Parties.

3. The Parties shall seek to identify and develop innovative cooperation activities

that provide added value to trade and investment between the Parties.

ARTICLE 13.3

Memorandum of Understanding

This Chapter shall be implemented on the basis of a Memorandum of
Understanding on Cooperation and Capacity Building between the EFTA States and
Malaysia. It shall be signed in parallel with this Agreement.

ARTICLE 13.4

Forms of Cooperation

1. The Parties recognise that cooperation and capacity building activities may be
undertaken between two or more Parties on a mutually agreed basis and shall seek to
complement and build on existing agreements or arrangements between them.

2. Cooperation and capacity building provided by the EFTA States for the
implementation of this Chapter shall be carried out through programmes administered by
the EFTA Secretariat, without prejudice to other cooperation and capacity building
programmes that the Parties may develop in fields covered by this Agreement.

3. Cooperation and capacity building provided by Malaysia for the implementation
of this Chapter shall be administered by the Ministry of Investment, Trade and Industry
of Malaysia, without prejudice to other cooperation and capacity building programmes
that the Parties may develop in fields covered by this Agreement.

4. The Parties shall cooperate with the objective of identifying and employing the

most effective methods and means for the implementation of this Chapter. To this end
they may, if appropriate, coordinate efforts with relevant international organisations.

-85-

5. The Parties shall endeavour to encourage technical, technological and scientific
cooperation in a manner as agreed by the Parties and in accordance with their domestic
laws and regulations.

6. Means of cooperation and capacity building may include:

(a) exchange of information, training, visits, exchange of experts and
internships, and facilitating contacts between relevant institutions and
economic operators;

(b) facilitation of dialogue and exchange of experiences between relevant
institutions and economic operators involved in trade and investment
promotion;

(c) implementation of joint actions such as seminars, workshops, meetings,
training sessions, and outreach;

(d) promotion and encouragement of cooperation and matchmaking between
academia, institutions dedicated to research, and private sectors of the
Parties;

(e) technical and administrative assistance; and

(f) other forms of cooperation as mutually agreed by the Parties.

ARTICLE 13.5
Costs of Cooperation

1. The implementation of cooperation under this Chapter shall be subject to the
availability of funds and resources of each Party.

2. Costs of cooperation under this Chapter shall be borne by the Parties within the
limits of their own capacities and through their own channels, in a manner to be mutually
agreed upon by the Parties.

ARTICLE 13.6

Sub-Committee on Cooperation and Capacity Building

I. For the purposes of effective implementation and operation of this Chapter, the
Parties hereby establish a Sub-Committee on Cooperation and Capacity Building
(Cooperation Sub-Committee), composed of government representatives of each Party.

2. The functions of the Cooperation Sub-Committee shall be to:

(a) review the implementation or operation of this Chapter and receiving
reports from Parties on their involvement with technical activities under
this Agreement;

- 86-

(b) facilitate the exchange of information between Parties in areas including,
but not limited to, experiences and lessons learned through cooperation
and capacity building activities undertaken between them;

(c) discuss and consider issues or proposals for further cooperation and
capacity building activities;

(d) initiate and undertake collaboration as appropriate to enhance and facilitate
public-private partnerships in cooperation and capacity building activities;

(e) Invite, as appropriate, private sector entities, non-governmental
organisations or other relevant institutions, to assist in the development
and implementation of cooperation and capacity building activities;

(f) establish ad hoc working groups, as appropriate, which may include
government or non-government representatives or both;

(g) coordinate with other sub-committees and working groups established
under this Agreement, as appropriate;

(h) develop rules of procedures for the conduct of its work, as may be required
by the Cooperation Sub-Committee; and

(1) engage in other activities as the Parties may agree upon.

3. The Cooperation Sub-Committee shall meet within one year of the date of entry
into force of this Agreement, and thereafter as necessary.

4. The Cooperation Sub-Committee shall act by consensus.

5. The Cooperation Sub-Committee shall produce an agreed record of its meetings,
including recommendations and next steps and, as appropriate, report to the Joint
Committee.

6. The Cooperation Sub-Committee shall respect existing consultation mechanisms
between Parties and, as appropriate, share information and coordinate with such
mechanisms to ensure effective and efficient implementation of cooperative activities and
projects.

ARTICLE 13.7

Contact Points

The Parties shall exchange names and addresses of designated contact points for
matters pertaining to cooperation under this Chapter.

-87-

ARTICLE 13.8

Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

No Party shall have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 15 (Dispute
Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.

- 88 -

CHAPTER 14

INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 14.1

Establishment of the EFTA-Malaysia Joint Committee

The Parties hereby establish the EFTA-Malaysia Joint Committee (Joint
Committee) comprising representatives of each Party. Each Party shall be responsible for
the composition of its delegation.

ARTICLE 14.2

Functions of the Joint Committee

1. The Joint Committee shall:
(a) consider and supervise the implementation of this Agreement;

(b) keep under review the possibility of further removal of barriers to trade
and other restrictive measures concerning trade between the Parties;

(c) oversee the further elaboration of this Agreement;

(d) supervise the work of all sub-committees and working groups established
under this Agreement;

(e) endeavour to resolve disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation
or application of this Agreement; and

(f) consider any other matter as agreed by the Parties.

2. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working
groups as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks. Except where
otherwise provided for in this Agreement, the sub-committees and working groups shall
work under a mandate established by the Joint Committee. The Joint Committee may
refer matters to, or consider matters raised by, the sub-committees or working groups.
The Joint Committee may merge or dissolve any sub-committees or working groups it
has established.

3. The Joint Committee may take decisions as provided for in this Agreement. On
other matters, the Joint Committee may make recommendations to the Parties.

4. The Joint Committee shall take decisions and make recommendations by
consensus. The Joint Committee may also adopt decisions and make recommendations
regarding issues related only to Malaysia and one or more EFTA States. In such cases,
consensus shall only involve the Parties concerned, and the decision or recommendation
shall apply only to those Parties.

- $9 -

5. If a representative of a Party in the Joint Committee has accepted a decision
subject to the fulfilment of domestic legal requirements, the decision shall enter into force
on the first day of the third month following the date that the last Party, notifies the
Depositary that its domestic legal requirements have been fulfilled, unless otherwise
specified in the decision.

6. The Joint Committee shall meet within one year from the date of entry into force
of this Agreement. Thereafter, it shall meet whenever necessary but normally every two
years. Its meetings shall be chaired jointly by one of the EFTA States and Malaysia.
Meetings of the Joint Committee shall be held in person or, if agreed, by technological
means.

7. Each Party may request at any time, through a notice in writing to the other Parties,
that a special meeting of the Joint Committee be held. Such a meeting shall take place
within 30 days of receipt of the request, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

8. The Joint Committee shall establish its rules of procedure.

ARTICLE 14.3

Contact Points

Each Party shall designate a contact point or points to facilitate communications
among the Parties.

- 90 -

CHAPTER 15
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

ARTICLE 15.1

Scope and Coverage

1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply to
the settlement of disputes between the Parties regarding the interpretation and application
of this Agreement.

2. Subject to Article 15.2 (Choice of Forum), this Chapter is without prejudice to the
rights of the Parties to have recourse to dispute settlement procedures available under
other agreements to which they are parties.

ARTICLE 15.2

Choice of Forum

I. Where a dispute regarding the same matter arises under this Agreement and under
the WTO Agreement, the complaining Party may select the dispute settlement procedure
in which to settle the dispute.”°

2. The complaining Party shall notify in writing all other Parties of its intention to
select a particular forum before doing so.

3. The forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of the other.

4. For the purposes of paragraph 1, dispute settlement procedures under the WTO
Agreement are deemed to be selected by a Party’s request for the establishment of a panel
under Article 6 of the WTO Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the
Settlement of Disputes, whereas dispute settlement procedures under this Agreement are
deemed to be selected upon a request for arbitration pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article
15.5 (Request for Establishment of the Arbitration Panel).

ARTICLE 15.3

Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation

I. The Parties to the dispute may at any time agree to good offices, conciliation or
mediation. They may begin and be terminated at any time.

23 For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms “Party”, “Party to the dispute”, “complaining Party”

and “Party complained against” can denote one or more Parties.

9] -

2. If the Parties to the dispute agree, good offices, conciliation or mediation
proceedings may continue while the dispute proceeds for resolution before an arbitration
panel.

3. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation and mediation and positions
taken by the Parties to the dispute during these proceedings shall be confidential and
without prejudice to their rights in any further proceedings.

ARTICLE 15.4

Consultations

1. The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation and
application of this Agreement, and shall make every attempt through cooperation and
consultations to reach a mutually satisfactory solution of any matter raised in accordance
with this Article.

2. A Party may request in writing consultations with another Party if it considers that
a measure is inconsistent with this Agreement. The Party requesting consultations shall
at the same time notify the other Parties in writing of the request. The Party to which the
request is made shall reply to the request within ten days from the date of receipt of the
request for consultations. If the Parties requesting and receiving the request for
consultation agree, the consultations may take place in the Joint Committee.

3. Consultations may be held in person or by any technological means available to
the consulting Parties.

4. Consultations shall commence within 30 days from the date of receipt of the
request for consultations. Consultations on urgent matters, including those on perishable
goods, shall commence within 15 days from the date of receipt of the request for
consultations.

5. The consulting Parties shall provide sufficient information to enable a full
examination of whether the measure is inconsistent with this Agreement and treat as
confidential any information designated as such by the Party providing the information.
The request for consultation shall include the reasons for the request, including the
identification of the measure at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the complaint.
The consulting Parties shall make available for the consultations personnel who have
expertise in the matter.

6. The consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of the
Parties in any further proceedings.

7. Whenever a Party other than the consulting Parties considers that it has an interest
in the consultations, such Party may notify the consulting Parties no later than seven days
after the date of receipt of the copy of the request for consultations referred to in paragraph
2, of its desire to be joined in the consultations. The notifying Party shall simultaneously
provide a copy of the notification to the other Parties.

8. The consulting Parties shall inform the other Parties of any mutually agreed
resolution of the matter.

92 -

ARTICLE 15.5

Request for Establishment of the Arbitration Panel

1. The complaining Party may request the establishment of an arbitration panel by
means of a written request to the Party complained against, if:

(a) the Party complained against does not reply to the request within ten days
in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 15.4 (Consultations);

(b) the Party complained against does not enter into consultations within 30
days, or 15 days for urgent matters including those on perishable goods,
from the date of receipt of the request for consultations in accordance with
paragraph 3 of Article 15.4 (Consultations);

(c) the consultations referred to in Article 15.4 (Consultations) fail to settle a
dispute within 60 days, or 30 days for urgent matters including those on
perishable goods, from the date of receipt of the request for consultations
by the Party complained against.

2. A copy of this request shall be communicated to the other Parties.

3. The request for the establishment of an arbitration panel made pursuant to
paragraph 1 shall identify the specific measure at issue and provide a brief summary of
the legal and factual basis of the complaint sufficient to present the problem clearly.

ARTICLE 15.6

Terms of Reference

1. Unless the Parties to the dispute otherwise agree within 20 days from the date of
receipt of the request for the establishment of the arbitration panel, the terms of reference
for the arbitration panel shall be:

“To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the matter
referred to in the request for the establishment of an arbitration panel pursuant to
Article 15.5 (Request for the Establishment of the Arbitration Panel) and issue a

written report, to make findings of law and fact together with the reasons, as well
as recommendations, if any, for the resolution of the dispute.”

2. The recommendations of the arbitration panel cannot add to or diminish the rights
and obligations of the Parties to the dispute provided in this Agreement.
ARTICLE 15.7

Composition of the Arbitration Panel

1. An arbitration panel shall consist of three arbitrators. In the written request
pursuant to Article 15.5 (Request for Establishment of Arbitration Panel), the

-93-

complaining Party shall appoint one arbitrator. Within 30 days from the date of receipt of
the request, the Party complained against shall appoint another arbitrator.

2. The Parties to the dispute shall designate by common agreement the third
arbitrator who shall chair the arbitration panel. If the Parties to the dispute have not
reached the agreement on the third arbitrator within 30 days from the appointment of the
second arbitrator, the two arbitrators appointed in accordance with paragraph 1 shall,
within 15 days, designate the third arbitrator. If any arbitrator has not been appointed
within 75 days of receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 1, either Party to the
dispute may request the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA)
to make the necessary appointments. In the event where the Secretary-General of the PCA
is not able to appoint the third arbitrator or is a national or permanent resident of a Party
to the dispute, any Party to the dispute may request the Deputy Secretary-General of the
PCA or the next person in line who is not a national or permanent resident of a Party to
the dispute to make the necessary appointments.

3. All arbitrators shall have specialised knowledge or experience in law,
international trade or other matters relating to this Agreement or in the resolution of
disputes arising under international trade agreements. They shall be independent and
impartial, including serving in their individual capacities and not be affiliated with,
neither take instructions from any Party to the dispute nor have dealt with the case in any
capacity. A prospective arbitrator shall disclose to those who approach him or her in
connection with his or her possible appointment any circumstances likely to give rise to
justifiable doubts as to his or her impartiality or independence. An arbitrator, once
appointed, shall disclose such circumstances to the Parties to the dispute unless they have
already been informed by him or her of these circumstances. An appointed arbitrator shall
continue to disclose any such circumstances as soon as he or she becomes aware of them.

4. The chair of the arbitration panel shall not be a national, permanent resident nor
have his or her usual place of residence in a Party to the dispute.

5. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which the
last arbitrator is appointed.

6. Any arbitrator may be challenged if circumstances give rise to justifiable doubts
as to the arbitrator’s impartiality, or independence. If a Party to the dispute does not agree
with the challenge or the challenged arbitrator does not withdraw, the Party making the
challenge may request the Secretary-General of the PCA to decide on the challenge. If
the Secretary-General is unable to act or is a national or permanent resident of a Party to
the dispute, the Party making the challenge may request the Deputy Secretary-General of
the PCA or the next person in line who is not a national or permanent resident of a party
to the dispute to make a decision on the challenge.

7. If an arbitrator resigns, is removed or becomes unable to act, a successor shall be
appointed in the same manner as prescribed for the appointment of the original arbitrator.
The work of the arbitration panel shall be suspended pending appointment of the
successor.

8. Where more than one Party requests the establishment of an arbitration panel
relating to the same matter or where the request involves more than one Party complained

-~94-

against, and whenever feasible, a single arbitration panel should be established to examine
complaints relating to the same matter.

9. A Party which is not a Party to the dispute shall be entitled, on delivery of a written
notice to the Parties to the dispute, to make written submissions to the arbitration panel,
receive written submissions, including annexes, from the Parties to the dispute, attend
hearings and make oral statements.

ARTICLE 15.8

Procedures of the Arbitration Panel

1. Unless otherwise specified in this Agreement or agreed between the Parties to the
dispute, the procedures of the arbitration panel shall be governed by Articles 2 and 4 and
Section III (except Article 26) and Section IV (except Articles 35 and 37) of the Optional
Rules for Arbitrating Disputes between Two States of the Permanent Court of Arbitration,
as effective from 20 October 1992, mutatis mutandis.

2. The arbitration panel shall examine the matter referred to it in the request for the
establishment of an arbitration panel in the light of the relevant provisions of this
Agreement which the arbitration panel shall interpret in accordance with customary rules
of interpretation of public international law.

3. The hearings of the arbitration panel shall be open to the public, unless the Parties
to the dispute decide otherwise. The arbitration panel shall close the hearing for the
duration of any discussions of confidential information.

4. There shall be no ex parte communications with the arbitration panel concerning
matters under its consideration.

5. The arbitration panel may hire up to three assistants, unless otherwise required by
the arbitration panel or agreed by the Parties to the dispute.

6. All information or documents submitted by a Party to the dispute to the arbitration
panel shall, at the same time as it is submitted to the arbitration panel, be transmitted by
that Party to the other Party to the dispute.

7. The Parties to the dispute and the arbitration panel shall treat as confidential
information and documents submitted to the arbitration panel which has been designated
as confidential by the submitting Party. Any Party may make public statements as to its
own position or submissions regarding the dispute. Where a Party to the dispute has
provided information or written submissions designated to be confidential, that party to
the dispute shall, within 30 days of a request of the other Party to the dispute, provide a
non-confidential summary of the information or written submissions which may be
disclosed to the public.

8. The deliberations of the arbitration panel shall be kept confidential. The
arbitration panel shall take its decisions by consensus. In the event where the arbitration
panel is unable to reach a consensus, it may take its decisions by majority vote. Any
member of the arbitration panel may furnish separate opinions on matters not
unanimously agreed. The arbitration panel shall not disclose which members of the

-95-

arbitration panel are associated with majority or minority opinions. The reports of the
arbitration panel shall be drafted without the presence of the Parties to the dispute.

ARTICLE 15.9

Arbitration Panel Reports

1. The arbitration panel shall normally issue to the Parties to the dispute an initial
report within 90 days of the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. The initial
report should be issued no later than 120 days after the date of the establishment of the
arbitration panel.

2. Any party to the dispute may submit written comments to the arbitration panel on
its initial report within 14 days of the receipt of the report. After considering any written
comments by the Parties to the dispute on the initial report, the arbitration panel may
reconsider its report and make any further examination it considers appropriate.

3. The arbitration panel shall normally issue to the Parties to the dispute a final report
within 30 days from the date of receipt of the initial report. The ruling should be issued
no later than 60 days after the date of receipt of the initial report.

4. The initial and final reports shall contain the findings of facts, the applicability of
the relevant provisions, a descriptive part summarising the submissions and arguments of
the Parties to the dispute, the reasons for the arbitration panel’s findings and rulings as
well as recommendations, if any, for the resolution of the dispute and the implementations
of the ruling.

5. The final report, as well as any rulings under Articles 15.11 (Implementation of
the Final Report) and 15.12 (Compensation and Suspension of Benefits), shall be
communicated to the Parties and shall, subject to the protection of confidential
information, be made public.

6. The report and any ruling of the arbitration panel shall be final and binding on the
Parties to the dispute.

7. On matters of urgency, including those regarding perishable goods, the arbitration
panel shall make every effort to issue its initial and final reports to the Parties to the
dispute within half of the respective time periods under paragraphs 1 and 3.

ARTICLE 15.10
Suspension or Termination of Proceedings

I. The Parties to the dispute may agree that an arbitration panel suspends its work at
any time for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date of such agreement. In the
event of such a suspension, the timeframes regarding the work of the arbitration panel
shall be extended by the amount of time that the work was suspended. If the work of an
arbitration panel has been suspended for more than 12 months, the authority for the
establishment of the arbitration panel shall lapse unless the Parties to the dispute agree

- 96 -

otherwise. This shall not prejudice the rights of the complaining Party to request at a later
stage, the establishment of an arbitration panel on the same matter.

2. A complaining Party may withdraw its complaint at any time before the initial
report has been issued. Such withdrawal is without prejudice to its right to introduce a
new complaint regarding the same issue at a later point in time, no earlier than 12 months
from the date of withdrawal.

3. The Parties to the dispute may agree to terminate the proceedings of the arbitration
panel by jointly notifying the chair of the arbitration panel at any time before the issuance
of the final report to the Parties to the dispute.

4. An arbitration panel may, at any stage of the proceedings prior to the issuance of
the final report, propose that the Parties to the dispute seek to settle the dispute amicably.

ARTICLE 15.11

Implementation of the Final Report

1. The Party complained against shall promptly comply with the ruling in the final
report. Where it is not practicable to comply immediately, the Party complained against
shall comply with the ruling within a reasonable period of time. The Parties to the dispute
shall endeavour to agree on a reasonable period of time to do so. In the absence of such
agreement within 45 days from the date of the issuance of the final report, a party to the
dispute may request the original arbitration panel to determine the length of the reasonable
period of time, in light of the particular circumstances of the case. The ruling of the
arbitration panel shall normally be given within 60 days from the date of receipt of that
request.

2. The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party of the measure
adopted in order to comply with the ruling in the final report, as well as provide a detailed
description of how the measure ensures compliance sufficient to allow the complaining
Party to assess the measure.

3. In case of disagreement as to the existence of a measure complying with the ruling
in the final report or to the consistency of that measure with the ruling, such disagreement
shall be decided by the same arbitration panel upon the request of a party to the dispute
before compensation can be sought or suspension of benefits can be applied in accordance
with Article 15.12 (Compensation and Suspension of Benefits). The ruling of the
arbitration panel shall normally be rendered within 90 days from the date of receipt of the
request.

ARTICLE 15.12

Compensation and Suspension of Benefits

1. If the Party complained against does not comply with a ruling of the arbitration
panel referred to in Article 15.11 (Implementation of the Final Report), that Party shall,
if so requested by the complaining Party, enter into consultations with a view to agreeing
on mutually acceptable compensation. If no such agreement has been reached within 20

-97-

days from the date of receipt of the request, the complaining Party shall be entitled to
suspend the application of benefits granted under this Agreement but only equivalent to
those affected by the measure that the arbitration panel has found to be inconsistent with
this Agreement.

2. The complaining Party shall notify the Party complained against of the benefits
which it intends to suspend, the grounds for such suspension and when suspension will
commence, no later than 30 days before the date on which the suspension is due to take
effect. Within 15 days from the date of receipt of that notification, the Party complained
against may request the original arbitration panel to rule on whether the benefits which
the complaining Party intends to suspend are equivalent to those affected by the measure
found to be inconsistent with this Agreement, and whether the proposed suspension is in
accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall normally be
given within 45 days from the date of receipt of that request. Benefits shall not be
suspended until the arbitration panel has issued its ruling.

3. In considering what benefits to suspend, the complaining Party should first seek
to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors as that affected by the measure that the
arbitration panel has found to be inconsistent with this Agreement. The complaining Party
that considers it is not practicable or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or
sectors may suspend benefits in other sectors.

4. Compensation and suspension of benefits shall be temporary measures and shall
only be applied by the complaining Party until the measure found to be inconsistent with
this Agreement has been withdrawn or amended so as to bring it into conformity with this
Agreement, or until the Parties to the dispute have resolved the dispute otherwise. Neither
compensation nor suspension is preferred to full elimination of the non-conformity as
determined in the report of the arbitration panel referred to in Article 15.9 (Arbitration
Panel Report).

5. At the request of a party to the dispute, the original arbitration panel shall rule on
the conformity with the final report of any implementing measures adopted after the
suspension of benefits and, in light of such ruling, whether the suspension of benefits
should be terminated or modified. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall normally be
given within 30 days from the date of receipt of that request and shall be promptly
complied with.

ARTICLE 15.13

Other Provisions

1. Whenever possible, the arbitration panel referred to in Articles 15.11
(Implementation of the Final Report) and 15.12 (Compensation and Suspension of
Benefits) shall comprise of the same arbitrators who issued the final report. If this is not
possible, the replacement arbitrator shall be appointed pursuant to Article 15.7
(Composition and Establishment of Arbitration Panel).

2. Any time period mentioned in this Chapter may be modified by mutual agreement
of the Parties to the dispute.

- 98 -

3. When an arbitration panel considers that it cannot comply with a time frame
imposed on it under this Chapter, it shall inform the Parties to the dispute in writing of
the reasons for the delay and provide an estimate of the additional time required. Any
additional time required should not exceed 30 days.

4. A written submission, request, notice or other document shall be considered
received when it has been delivered to the addressee through diplomatic channels in the
territory of the addressee. At the same time, a copy of these documents shall be provided
in electronic format to the designated contact points. The contact points shall be notified
to the Joint Committee.

ARTICLE 15.14

Language
1. All proceedings pursuant to this Chapter shall be conducted in English.
2. Any document submitted for use in any proceedings pursuant to this Chapter shall

be in English.

- 99 -

CHAPTER 16

FINAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 16.1

Annexes and Appendices

The Annexes to this Agreement, including their Appendices, constitute an integral
part of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 16.2

Amendments

1. Any Party may submit proposals for amendments to this Agreement to the Joint
Committee for consideration and recommendation.

2. Amendments to this Agreement shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or
approval in accordance with the Parties’ respective legal requirements.

3. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, amendments shall enter into force on the
first day of the third month following the deposit of the last instrument of ratification,
acceptance or approval.

4. Notwithstanding paragraphs | to 3, the Joint Committee may decide to amend the
Annexes and Appendices to this Agreement.

5. If a Party has accepted a decision subject to the fulfilment of its domestic legal
requirements, the decision shall enter into force on the first day of the third month
following the date that the last Party notifies the Depositary that its internal requirements
have been fulfilled, unless otherwise specified in the decision.

6. The text of the amendments and the instruments of ratification, acceptance or
approval shall be deposited with the Depositary.

7. If its domestic legal requirements permit, a Party may apply any amendment
provisionally, pending its entry into force for that Party. Provisional application of
amendments shall be notified to the Depositary.

ARTICLE 16.3

Accession

l. Any State becoming a Member of EFTA may accede to this Agreement, provided
that the Joint Committee approves its accession, on terms and conditions to be agreed
upon by the Parties. The instrument of accession shall be deposited with the Depositary.

- 100 -

2. In relation to an acceding State, this Agreement shall enter into force on the first
day of the third month following the deposit of its instrument of accession, or the approval
of the terms of accession by the existing Parties, whichever is later.

ARTICLE 16.4
Withdrawal and Expiration
I. Each Party may withdraw from this Agreement by means of a written notification

to the Depositary. The withdrawal shall take effect six months after the date on which the
notification is received by the Depositary, unless the Parties agree on a different period.

2. If Malaysia withdraws, this Agreement shall expire when its withdrawal becomes
effective.
3. Any EFTA State which withdraws from the Convention establishing the European

Free Trade Association shall, ipso facto on the same day as the withdrawal takes effect,
cease to be a Party to this Agreement.

ARTICLE 16.5
Entry into Force

1. This Agreement is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval in accordance
with the respective domestic legal requirements of the Parties. The instruments of
ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Depositary.

2. If its respective domestic legal requirements permit, any Party may apply this
Agreement provisionally, pending its entry into force for that Party. Provisional
application of this Agreement under this paragraph shall be notified to the Depositary.

3. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the third month following
the date on which at least one EFTA State and Malaysia have deposited their instrument
of ratification, acceptance or approval with the Depositary.

4. In relation to an EFTA State depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance
or approval after the date on which at least one EFTA State and Malaysia have deposited
their instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval with the Depositary, this
Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the third month following the deposit
of its instrument.

ARTICLE 16.6
Depositary

The Government of Norway shall act as Depositary.