Inspired by their longstanding friendship and cooperation and growing trade relationship;

Desiring to enlarge the framework of relations between them through further liberalising trade;

Recognising that the strengthening of their economic partnership will bring economic and social benefits, create new opportunities for employment and improve the living standards of their people;

Building on their respective rights and obligations under the World  Trade Organisation and other multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements and arrangements;

Confirming their shared commitment to trade facilitation through removing non-tariff barriers to trade between them;

Desiring to strengthen the cooperative framework for the conduct of economic relations to ensure it is dynamic and it encourages broader and deeper economic cooperation;

Aware that economic development, social development and environmental protection are components of sustainable development and that free trade agreements can play an important role in promoting sustainable development; and

Resolved to promote bilateral trade through the establishment of clear and mutually advantageous trade rules and the avoidance of trade barriers,

Have agreed as follows:

    CHAPTER 1 INITIAL PROVISIONS

            Article 1.1 Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties, consistent with Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, hereby establish a free trade area.

Article 1.2 Objectives

The objectives of this Agreement are:

(a) to increase and enhance the economic cooperation between the Parties;

(b) to promote the expansion of trade through the harmonious development of the economic relations between the Parties;

(c) to gradually eliminate difficulties and restrictions on trade between the Parties so as to improve the efficiency and competitiveness of their respective sectors;

(d) to establish a framework of transparent and predictable rules to facilitate trade between the Parties; and

(e) to create an environment conducive to broadening and supplementing the scope of this Agreement to include trade in services and bilateral investment.

Article 1.3
Relation to Other Agreements

Nothing in this Agreement shall derogate from the existing rights and obligations of a Party under the WTO Agreement or any other multilateral or bilateral agreement to which it is a party. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any other agreement to which the Parties are party, the Parties shall immediately consult with each other within the Joint Committee with a view to finding a mutually satisfactory solution, taking into consideration general principles of public international law.

Article 1.4
Customs Unions and Free Trade Areas

Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free trade areas or other arrangements between either of the Parties and third countries, insofar as they do not alter the rights and obligations provided for in this Agreement.

      CHAPTER 2 GENERAL DEFINITIONS

    Article 2.1 General Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:

(a) Agreement means the Free Trade Agreement between the Government of Malaysia and the Government of the Republic of Turkiye;

(b) Agreement on Customs Valuation means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of the GATT 1994, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

(c) chapters, headings and subheadings means the chapters (two-digit codes), headings (four-digit codes) and the sub-headings (six-digit codes) used in the nomenclature which makes up the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System, referred to in this Chapter as "the Harmonised System" or "HS";

(d) customs duty includes any duty or charge of any kind imposed on, or in connection with, the importation of a good, including any form of surtax or surcharge imposed on, or in connection with, such importation. A customs duty does not include any:

(i) charges equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with Article III of GATT 1994;

(ii) duties imposed consistently with Chapter 8 (Trade Remedies);

(iii) fees	or	other	charges	imposed	consistently	with	Article	3.6 (Administrative Fees and Charges);

(e) Customs Authority means the authority that, according to the legislation  of each Party, is responsible for the administration and enforcement of its customs laws:

(i) in the case of Malaysia, the Royal Malaysian Customs Department, or its successor; and

(ii) in the case of Turkiye, the Ministry of Customs and Trade, or its successor;

(f) days means calendar days, including weekends and holidays;

(g) GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

(h) goods means both materials and products;
(i) Harmonised System (HS) means the Harmonised Commodity Description and  Coding  System  governed  by  the  International  Convention  on   the

Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System, done at Brussels on 14 June 1983, including its General Rules of Interpretation, Section Notes, and Chapter Notes, and their amendments, as adopted and implemented by the Parties in their respective tariff laws;

(j) Joint Economic and Trade Council means the Joint Economic and Trade Council established under Article 11.1 (Joint Economic and Trade Council);

(k) Joint Committee  means  the  Joint  Committee  established  under Article
11.4 (Joint Committee);

(l) measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule, procedure, practice, decision, administrative action or any other form;

(m) originating goods means the goods that qualify as originating in accordance with Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin);

(n) person means both natural and legal persons;

(o) publish includes publication in written form or on the internet;

(p) territory1 means:

(i) with respect to Malaysia,

(AA) the territories of the Federation of Malaysia;

(BB) the territorial waters of Malaysia and the seabed and subsoil of the territorial waters, and the air space above such areas over which Malaysia has sovereignty; and

(CC) any area extending beyond the limits of the territorial waters of Malaysia, and the seabed and subsoil of any such area, which has been or may hereafter be designated under the laws of Malaysia and in accordance with international law as an area over which Malaysia has sovereign rights or jurisdiction for the purposes of exploring and exploiting the natural resources, whether living or non-living;

(ii) with respect to Turkiye, the land territory, internal waters, the territorial sea and the airspace above them, as well as the maritime areas beyond the territorial sea over which it has jurisdiction or sovereign rights for the purpose of exploration, exploitation and preservation of natural resources, pursuant to international law;

(q) WTO means the World Trade Organisation; and




1 Nothing in this Agreement, nor any cooperation, act or activity carried out in pursuant to this Agreement shall prejudice the political and legal position of the Parties with regard to any unsettled dispute concerning sovereignty or other rights over the territory and jurisdiction areas.

(r) WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organisation, done on 15 April 1994.

CHAPTER 3 TRADE IN GOODS

Article 3.1 Scope

Except as otherwise provided, this Chapter applies to trade in goods between the Parties.

    Article 3.2 National Treatment

Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in accordance with Article III of GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, and to this end, Article III of GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 3.3
Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall reduce or eliminate its customs duties on originating goods of the other Party in accordance with its Tariff Schedule set out in Annex 3-1.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may increase any existing customs duty or adopt any customs duty on an originating good of the other Party covered by this Agreement.

3. If, at any time a Party reduces its applied most-favoured-nation (hereinafter referred to as "MFN") customs duty rate after the entry into force of this Agreement, that duty rate shall apply as regards trade in goods covered by this Chapter, as long as it is lower than the customs duty rate calculated in accordance with the Party's Tariff Schedule in Annex 3-1.

4. On the request of either Party, the Joint Committee shall be convened to consider accelerating the reduction or elimination of customs duties set out in their respective Tariff Schedules in Annex 3-1. Following the decision of the Joint Committee, each Party shall give effect to such acceleration in accordance with  Article 14.5 (Amendments).

5. The Parties shall not introduce new or increase existing customs duties and charges having equivalent effect on exports from the date of entry into force of this Agreement. If a Party enters into any agreement with a non-Party where commitments are more favourable in terms of liberalisation of the customs duties and charges having equivalent effect on exports than that accorded under this Agreement, it shall without delay apply the same favourable treatment to the other Party.



Article 3.4 Classification of Goods

For the purposes of this Agreement, the classification of goods in trade between the Parties shall be in conformity with the Harmonised System (HS).

Article 3.5 Customs Valuation

For the purposes of determining the customs value of goods traded between the Parties, the Agreement on Customs Valuation, as may be amended shall, mutatis mutandis, be incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.

           Article 3.6 Administrative Fees and Charges

Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VIII:1 of GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes, that all fees and charges of whatever character (other than customs duties, charges equivalent to an internal tax or other internal charge applied consistently with Article III:2 of GATT 1994, and anti-dumping duty, countervailing duty and safeguard duty) imposed on or in connection with importation or exportation are limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered and do not represent an indirect protection to domestic goods or a taxation of imports or exports for fiscal purposes.

Article 3.7
Non-Tariff Measures

1. Except in accordance with Article XI of GATT 1994 or as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction other than duties, taxes or other charges on the importation of any good of the other Party or on the exportation or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of the other Party.

2. Each Party shall ensure the transparency of its non-tariff measures permitted under paragraph 1 and that they are not constituted, adopted or applied with a view to or with the effect of creating unnecessary restrictions to trade between the Parties.

Article 3.8
Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods

1. The Parties hereby establish a Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods, comprising of officials of the Parties.

2. For the purposes of effective implementation and operation of this Chapter, the functions of the Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods shall be:

(a) reviewing and monitoring the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

(b) discussing any issues related to this Chapter;

(c) reporting the findings and the outcome of discussions to the Joint Committee;

(d) promoting trade in goods between the Parties, including through consultations on accelerating tariff elimination under this Agreement and other issues as appropriate;

(e) addressing barriers to trade in goods between the Parties, especially those related to the application of non-tariff measures, and, if appropriate, referring such matters to the Joint Committee for its consideration; and

(f) carrying out other functions as may be delegated by the Joint Committee in accordance with Article 11.4 (Joint Committee).

3. The Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods shall meet at a venue and time, to be agreed by the Parties.

CHAPTER 4 RULES OF ORIGIN

SECTION 4-A GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 4.1 Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) aquaculture means the farming of aquatic organisms including fish, molluscs, crustaceans, other aquatic invertebrates and aquatic plants, from seedstock such as eggs, fry, fingerlings and larvae, by intervention in the rearing or growth processes to enhance production such as regular stocking, feeding, or protection from predators;

(b) competent authorities means the Ministry of Customs and Trade for Turkiye and the Ministry of International Trade and Industry for Malaysia;

(c) consignment means products which are either sent simultaneously from one exporter to one consignee or covered by a single transport document covering their shipment from the exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such a document, by a single invoice;

(d) customs value means the value determined in accordance with Agreement on Customs Valuation;

(e) ex-works price means the price paid for the product ex-works to the manufacturer in Turkiye or in Malaysia in whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out, provided the price includes the value of all the materials used, minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the product obtained is exported;

(f) generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) means the recognised consensus or substantial authoritative support in a Party, with respect to the recording of revenues, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities; the disclosure of information; and the preparation of financial statements. These standards may encompass broad guidelines of general application as well as detailed standards, practices and procedures;

(g) manufacture means any kind of working or processing including assembly or specific operations;

(h) material means any matter or substance including raw materials, ingredients, parts, and components used or consumed in the production of goods or physically incorporated into goods subjected to a process in the production of other goods;

(i) non-originating good or non-originating material means a good or material which does not qualify as originating under this Chapter;
(j) originating good or originating material means a good or material that

qualify as originating under this Chapter;

(k) packing materials or containers for transportation means goods used  to protect a good during its transportation, different from those containers  or materials used for its retail sale;

(l) product means the product being manufactured, even if it is intended for later use in another manufacturing operation;

(m) production means methods of obtaining goods including growing/planting, mining, harvesting, farming, raising, breeding, extracting, gathering, collecting, capturing, fishing, trapping, hunting, aquaculture, manufacturing, producing, processing or assembling a good;

(n) value of materials means the customs value at the time of importation of the non-originating materials used, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the non-originating materials in Turkiye or in Malaysia; and

(o) value of originating materials means the customs value at the time of importation of the originating materials used, if they are imported, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the originating materials in Turkiye or in Malaysia.


SECTION 4-B
DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS"

Article 4.2 Originating Products

For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be considered as originating in a Party:

(a) products wholly obtained in that Party within the meaning of Article 4.4 (Wholly Obtained Products); and

(b) products produced in that Party incorporating materials which have not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in that Party within the meaning of    Article
4.5 (Sufficiently Worked or Processed Products).

Article 4.3 Cumulation of Origin

1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 4.2 (Originating Products), materials originating in a Party shall be considered as materials originating in the  other Party when incorporated into a product there. It shall not be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing, provided they have undergone working or processing going beyond the operations referred to in Article
4.6 (Insufficient/Minimal Working or Processing).

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, materials falling under HS Chapters 25 to 97 originating in the European Union shall be considered as materials originating in Turkiye or Malaysia when further processed or incorporated into a product obtained there.

3. In order for the products referred to in paragraph 2 to acquire originating status, it shall not be necessary that the materials have undergone sufficient working or processing, provided that:

(a) the working or processing of the materials carried out in Turkiye or Malaysia goes beyond the operations referred to in Article 4.6 (Insufficient/Minimal Working or Processing);

(b) the materials were originating in the European Union, in application of rules of origin identical to those applicable if the said materials were exported directly to Turkiye or Malaysia; and

(c) Turkiye, Malaysia and the European Union have arrangements which allow for adequate administrative cooperation procedures ensuring full implementation of this cumulation mechanism as well as of Articles on certification and on verification of origin of the products.

4. The cumulation established in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall be applied provided that preferential trade agreements in accordance with Article XXIV of GATT 1994 between Turkiye, Malaysia and the European Union, respectively, are in force.

5. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, materials falling under HS Chapters 25 to 97 originating in a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (hereinafter referred to as "ASEAN") shall be considered as materials originating in Turkiye or Malaysia when further processed or incorporated into a product obtained there.

6. In order for the products referred to in paragraph 5 to acquire originating status, it shall not be necessary that the materials have undergone sufficient working or processing, provided that:

(a) the working or processing of the materials carried out in Turkiye or Malaysia goes beyond the operations referred to in Article 4.6 (Insufficient/Minimal Working or Processing);

(b) the materials were originating in a member of ASEAN, in application of rules of origin identical to those applicable if the said materials were exported directly to Turkiye or Malaysia; and

(c) Turkiye, Malaysia and the relevant member of ASEAN have arrangements which allow for adequate administrative cooperation procedures    ensuring

full implementation of this cumulation mechanism as well as of Articles on certification and on verification of origin of the products.

7. The cumulation established in paragraphs 5 and 6 shall be applied provided that preferential trade agreements in accordance with Article XXIV of GATT 1994 between Turkiye, Malaysia and the relevant member of ASEAN, respectively, are in force.

Article 4.4
Wholly Obtained Products

1. The following shall be considered as wholly obtained in Turkiye or in Malaysia:

(a) minerals and other naturally occurring substances, not included in subparagraphs (b) to (e), extracted or taken from its soil, water, seabed or beneath the seabed of a Party;

(b) plant and plant goods, including fruits, flowers, vegetables, trees, seaweed, fungi and live plants, grown, cultivated, planted, harvested, picked, or gathered in the territory of a Party;

(c) live animals born and raised in the territory of a Party;

(d) products from live animals raised there;

(e) goods obtained from hunting, trapping, fishing,  farming,  cultivating, planting, growing, aquaculture, gathering, or capturing in the territory of a Party;

(f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea including shellfish and other marine life or marine goods outside the territorial waters of Turkiye or of Malaysia by their vessels;

(g) goods obtained, processed or produced on board their factory ships exclusively from products referred to in subparagraph (f);

(h) used articles collected there which can no longer perform their original purpose nor are capable of being restored or repaired and are fit only for the recovery of raw materials;

(i) waste, scrap or used goods collected in the territory of a Party which can  no longer perform their original purpose nor are capable of being restored or repaired and are fit only for the recovery of raw materials;

(j) goods taken from the waters, seabed or beneath the seabed outside the territorial waters of that Party, provided that Party has the rights to exploit such waters, seabed and beneath the seabed in accordance with international law; and

(k) goods produced in the territory of a Party solely from goods referred to in subparagraphs (a) to (j) or from their derivatives, at any stage of production.

2. The terms "their vessels" and "their factory ships" in subparagraphs 1(f) and (g) shall apply only to vessels and factory ships:

(a) which are registered in Turkiye or in Malaysia;

(b) which sail under the flag of Turkiye or of Malaysia;

(c) which meet one of the following conditions:

(i) they are at least 50% owned by nationals of Turkiye or of Malaysia; or

(ii) they are owned by companies:

(AA)	which have their head office and their main place  of business in Turkiye or in Malaysia; and

(BB)	which are at least 50% owned by Turkiye or by Malaysia, by public entities or nationals of one of those Parties.

Article 4.5
Sufficiently Worked or Processed Products

1. For the purposes of subparagraph (b) of Article 4.2 (Originating Products), products which are not wholly obtained are considered to be sufficiently worked or processed when the conditions set out in the list in Annex 4-2 are fulfilled. The conditions referred to above indicate, for all products covered by this Agreement, the working or processing which must be carried out on non-originating materials used in manufacturing and apply only in relation to such materials. It follows that if a product which has acquired originating status by fulfilling the conditions set out in the list is used in the manufacture of another product, the conditions applicable to the product in which it is incorporated do not apply to it, and no account shall be taken of the non- originating materials which may have been used in its manufacture.

2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1 and subject to paragraphs 3 and 4, non-originating materials which, according to the conditions set out in the list in Annex 4-2 are not to be used in the manufacture of a given product may nevertheless be used, provided that their total value or net weight assessed for the product does not exceed:

(a) 10% of the weight of the product for products falling under Chapter 2 and within Chapters 4 to 24 of the Harmonised System, other than processed fishery products of Chapter 16;

(b) 10% of the ex-works price of the product for other products, except for products falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonised System, for which the tolerances mentioned in Notes 6 and 7 of Annex 4-1, shall apply.

3. Paragraph 2 shall not allow to exceed any of the percentages for the maximum content of non-originating materials as specified in the rules laid down in the list in Annex 4-2.

4. Paragraphs 2 and 3 shall not apply to products wholly obtained in a Party  within the meaning of Article 4.4 (Wholly Obtained Products). However, without prejudice to Article 4.6 (Insufficient/Minimal Working or Processing) and paragraph 2 of Article 4.7 (Unit of Qualification), the tolerance provided for in those paragraphs shall nevertheless apply to the sum of all the materials which are used in the manufacture of a product and for which the rule laid down in the list in Annex 4-2 for that product requires that such materials be wholly obtained.

                Article 4.6 Insufficient/Minimal Working or Processing

1. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the following operations shall be considered as insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products, whether or not the requirements of Article 4.5 (Sufficiently Worked or Processed Products) are satisfied:

(a) preserving operations to ensure that the products remain in good condition during transport and storage;

(b) breaking-up and assembly of packages; change of packaging or presenting products for sale;

(c) washing, cleaning; removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;

(d) simple painting and polishing operations;

(e) sharpening, slitting, simple coiling and uncoiling, bending, simple grinding or simple cutting;

(f) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching (including the making-up of sets of articles);

(g) ironing or pressing of textiles;

(h) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and rice;

(i) operations to colour or flavour sugar or form sugar lumps; partial or total milling of crystal sugar;

(j) peeling, stoning and shelling of fruits, nuts and vegetables;

(k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards and all other simple packaging operations;

(l) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on products or their packaging;

(m) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds; mixing of sugar with any material;

(n) simple addition of water or dilution or dehydration or denaturation of products;

(o) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or disassembly of products into parts;

(p) slaughter of animals; and

(q) a combination of two or more operations specified in subparagraphs (a) to (p).

2. All operations carried out either in Turkiye or in Malaysia on a given product shall be considered together when determining whether the working or processing undergone by that product is to be regarded as insufficient within the meaning of paragraph 1.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, operations shall be considered simple when neither special skills nor machines, apparatus or tools especially produced or installed for those operations are required for their performance.

Article 4.7
Unit of Qualification

1. The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Chapter  shall be the particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonised System. It follows that:

(a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under the terms of the Harmonised System in a single heading, the whole constitutes the unit of qualification;

(b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under the same heading of the Harmonised System, each product must be taken individually when applying the provisions of this Chapter.

2. Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonised System, packaging is  included with the product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of determining origin.

            Article 4.8 Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools

1. Accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or other information materials delivered with a good that form part of the good's standard accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or other information materials shall be regarded as a part of the good, and shall be disregarded in determining whether or not all the non-originating materials used in the production of the originating goods undergo the applicable change in tariff classification provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or other information materials are classified with and not invoiced separately from the good; and

(b) the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or other information materials are customary for the good.

2. The value of packages and packing materials for retail sale, shall be taken into account in determining the origin of that good as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, provided that the packages and packing materials are considered to be forming a whole with the good.

3. If a good is subject to the change in tariff classification criterion provided in Annex 4-2, packages and packing materials classified together with the packaged good, shall not be taken into account in determining origin.

4. Packing materials and containers used exclusively for the transportation of a good shall not be taken into account in determining the origin of such goods.

Article 4.9 Sets

Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 of the Harmonised System, shall be regarded as originating when all component products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is composed of originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be regarded as originating, provided that the value of the non-originating products does not exceed 15% of the ex-works price of the set.

Article 4.10 Neutral Elements

In order to determine whether a product originates, it shall not be necessary to determine the origin of the following, which might be used in its production and not physically incorporated into the good, which includes the following:

(a) energy, fuel, catalysts and solvents;

(b) plant and equipment;

(c) machines, tools, dies and moulds;

(d) lubricants, greases, compounding materials and other materials used in production or used to operate equipment and buildings;

(e) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and supplies;

(f) equipment, devices and supplies used for testing or inspecting goods; and

(g) goods which do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the final composition of the product.


         SECTION 4-C TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS

      Article 4.11 Principle of Territoriality

1. Except as provided for in Article 4.3 (Cumulation of Origin), the conditions set out in Section 4-B (Definition of the Concept of "Originating Products") relating to the acquisition of originating status must be fulfilled without interruption in a Party.

2. If originating goods exported from a Party to a non-Party return, they must be considered as non-originating, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:

(a) the returning goods are the same as those exported; and

(b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve them in good condition while in that non-Party or while being exported.

    Article 4.12 Direct Consignment

1. The products declared for importation in a Party shall be the same products as exported from the other Party in which they are considered to originate. They shall not have been altered, transformed in any way or subjected to operations other than operations to preserve them in good condition, prior to being declared for import. Storage of products or consignments and splitting of consignments may take place where carried out under the responsibility of the exporter or of a subsequent holder of the goods and the products remain under customs supervision in the country(ies) of transit.

2. Compliance with paragraph 1 shall be considered as satisfied unless the customs authorities have reason to believe the contrary; in such cases, the customs authorities may request the declarant to provide evidence of compliance, which may be given by any means, including contractual transport documents such as bills of lading or factual or concrete evidence based on marking or numbering of packages or any evidence related to the goods themselves.

Article 4.13 Exhibitions

1. Originating products sent for exhibition in a third country and sold after the exhibition for importation in Turkiye or in Malaysia shall benefit on importation from the provisions of the Agreement, provided it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:

(a) an exporter has consigned these products from Turkiye or from Malaysia to the country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there;

(b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person in Turkiye or in Malaysia;

(c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in the state in which they were sent for exhibition; and

(d) the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition.

2. A proof of origin must be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-E (Proof of Origin) and submitted to the customs authorities of the importing Party in the normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the conditions under which they have been exhibited may be required.

3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar public show or display, which is not organised for private purposes in shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign products, and during which the products remain under customs control.


        SECTION 4-D DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION

Article 4.14
Drawback of, or Exemption from, Customs Duties

After two years from the entry into force of this Agreement, upon the request of either Party, the Joint Committee shall review the operation of duty drawback and inward processing schemes of the Parties. The Joint Committee may establish the criteria to review duty drawback and inward processing issues of the Parties and may consider prohibiting the application of duty drawback.


SECTION 4-E PROOF OF ORIGIN

     Article 4.15 General Requirements

1. Products originating in Turkiye shall, on importation into Malaysia and products originating in Malaysia shall, on importation into Turkiye, benefit from this Agreement upon submission of either:

(a) a Certificate of Origin, a specimen of which appears in Annex 4-3; or

(b) in the cases specified in paragraph 1 of Article 4.21 (Conditions for Invoice Declaration), a declaration, the text of which appears in Annex 4-4, given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery note or any other commercial document which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified (hereinafter referred to as the "invoice declaration").

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products within the meaning of this Chapter shall, in the cases specified in Article 4.27 (Exemption from Proof of Origin), benefit from this Agreement without it being necessary to submit any of the  documents referred to above.

Article 4.16
Procedure for the Issuance of Certificate of Origin

1. A Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the competent authorities of the exporting Party on application having been made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter's responsibility, by his authorised representative.

2. For this purpose, the exporter or his authorised representative shall fill out Certificate of Origin specimen of which appears in Annex 4-3. The form shall be completed in English and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting Party. If it is handwritten, it shall be completed clearly and legibly in ink and printed characters. In that case, neither erasures nor alterations shall be allowed on the form. The description of the products must be given in the box reserved for this purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where the box is not completely filled, a horizontal line must be drawn below the last line of the description, the empty space being crossed through.

3. The exporter applying for the issue of Certificate of Origin shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the competent authorities of the exporting Party where the Certificate of Origin is issued, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter.

4. A Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the competent authorities of Turkiye or of Malaysia if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in Turkiye or in Malaysia and fulfil the other requirements of this Chapter.

5. The competent authorities issuing Certificate of Origin shall take any steps necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter. For this purpose, the Customs Authorities shall, in accordance with its domestic legislation, have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate.

6. The issuing competent authorities shall also ensure that the form referred to in paragraph 2 is duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.

7. The date of issue of Certificate of Origin shall be indicated in Box 11 of the certificate.

8. A Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the competent authorities and made available to the exporter as soon as actual exportation has been effected or made known.

Article 4.17
Certificate of Origin Issued Retrospectively

1. Notwithstanding paragraph 8 of Article 4.16 (Procedure for the Issuance of Certificate of Origin), a Certificate of Origin may exceptionally be issued after exportation but not later than 12 months from the date of exportation of the    products

to which it relates if:

(a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary omissions or special circumstances; or

(b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities or other competent authorities that a Certificate of Origin was issued, but was not accepted at importation for technical reasons.

2. For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter must indicate in his application the place and date of exportation of the products to which the Certificate of Origin relates, and state the reasons for his request.

3. The competent authorities may issue a Certificate of Origin retrospectively only after verifying that the information supplied in the exporter's application agrees with that in the corresponding file.

4. Certificate of Origin issued retrospectively must bear with the words "ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY". The endorsement shall be inserted in the 'Remarks' box of the Certificate of Origin.

Article 4.18
Issuance of a Duplicate Certificate of Origin

1. In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a Certificate of Origin, the exporter may apply to the competent authorities which issued it for a duplicate to be made out on the basis of the export documents in their possession.

2. The duplicate Certificate of Origin will indicate the date of issuance of the original Certificate of Origin and shall take effect as from the original date.

Article 4.19
Issuance of Certificate of Origin on the Basis of a Proof of Origin Issued or Made out Previously

When originating products are placed under the control of a customs office in Turkiye or Malaysia, the original proof of origin may be replaced by one or more proof of origin for the purpose of sending all or some of these products elsewhere within a Party.  The replacement proof(s) of origin shall be issued by the customs office in Turkiye under whose control the products are placed or competent authorities in Malaysia.

Article 4.20
Identical and Interchangeable Materials

The determination of whether identical and interchangeable materials are originating materials shall be made either by physical segregation of each of the materials, or by the use of generally accepted accounting principles of stock control, or inventory management applicable in the exporting Party.

           Article  4.21 Conditions for Invoice Declaration

1. An invoice declaration as referred to in subparagraph 1(b) of Article 4.15 (General Requirements) may be made out:

(a) by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 4.22 (Approved Exporter); or

(b) by any exporter for any consignment consisting of one or more packages containing originating products whose total value does not exceed USD10,000.

2. An invoice declaration may be made out if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in Turkiye or in Malaysia and fulfil the other requirements of this Chapter.

3. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities or other competent authorities of the exporting Party, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter.

4. An invoice declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or printing on the invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document, the declaration in English, the text of which appears in Annex 4-4, and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting Party. If they are handwritten, they shall be completed clearly and legibly in ink in printed characters. In that case, neither erasures nor alterations shall be allowed on these forms.

5. Invoice declarations shall bear the original signature of the exporter in manuscript. However, an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 4.22 (Approved Exporter) shall not be required to sign such declarations provided that he gives the customs authorities or other competent authorities of the exporting Party a written undertaking that he accepts full responsibility for any invoice declaration which identifies him as if it had been signed in manuscript by him.

6. An invoice declaration may be made out by the exporter when the products to which it relates are exported, or after exportation on condition that it is presented in the importing Party no longer than 12 months after the importation of the products to which it relates.

Article 4.22 Approved Exporter

1. The competent authorities of the exporting Party may authorise any exporter as "approved exporter" who makes frequent shipments of products under this Agreement to make out invoice declarations irrespective of the value of the products concerned. An exporter seeking such authorisation must offer to the satisfaction of the competent authorities evidence of the originating status of the products as well as the fulfilment  of the other requirements of this Chapter.

2. The competent authorities may grant the status of approved exporter subject to any conditions which they consider appropriate.

3. The competent authorities shall grant to the approved exporter a customs authorisation number or reference number which shall appear on the invoice declaration.

4. The competent authorities shall monitor the use of the authorisation by the approved exporter.

5. The competent authorities may withdraw the authorisation at any time. They shall do so where the approved exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in paragraph 1, does not fulfil the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or otherwise makes an incorrect use of the authorisation.

6. The competent authorities responsible for the implementation of the verification of proof of origin within the meaning of Article 4.33 (Verification of Proofs of Origin) may inform each other on the changes in granting authorisations to the approved exporters and may also mutually exchange the updated lists.


    Article 4.23 Third Party Invoice

The competent authorities of the importing Party may accept Certificate of Origin or invoice declaration in cases where the invoice is issued either by a company located in a third country or by an exporter for the account of that company, provided that the goods meet the requirements of this Chapter.

       Article 4.24 Validity of Proof of Origin

1. A proof of origin shall be valid for 12 months from the date of issue in the exporting Party, and must be submitted within the said period to the customs authorities of the importing Party.

2. Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of the importing Party after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be accepted  for the purpose of applying preferential treatment, where the failure to submit these documents by the final date set is due to exceptional circumstances.

3. In other cases of late presentation, the customs authorities of the importing Party may accept the proofs of origin where the products have been presented to customs before the said final date.

         Article 4.25 Submission of Proof of Origin

Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing Party in accordance with the procedures applicable in that country. The said authorities may require a translation of a proof of origin and may also require the import declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the importer to the effect that the products meet the requirements of this Chapter.

       Article 4.26 Importation by Instalments

Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs authorities of the importing Party, dismantled or non-assembled products within the meaning of General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonised System falling within Sections XVI and XVII or heading Nos. 7308 and 9406 of the Harmonised System are imported by instalments, a single proof of origin for such products shall be submitted to the customs authorities upon importation of the first instalment.

          Article 4.27 Exemptions from Proof of Origin

1. Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons from Malaysia to Turkiye or forming part of travellers' personal luggage travelling from Malaysia to Turkiye shall be admitted as originating products without requiring the submission of a proof of origin, provided that such products are not imported by way of trade and have been declared as meeting the requirements of this Chapter and where there is no doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In the case of products sent by post from Malaysia to Turkiye, this declaration can be made on the customs declaration CN22/CN23 or on a sheet of paper annexed to that document.

2. Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use of the recipients or travellers or their families from Malaysia to Turkiye shall not be considered as imports by way of trade if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the products that no commercial purpose is in view.

3. Furthermore, the total value of these products referred to paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not exceed EUR500 in the case of small packages or EUR1,200 in the case of products forming part of travellers' personal luggage.

4. In the case of consignments of goods originating in Turkiye and exported to Malaysia and not exceeding USD200 FOB, the requirement of a proof of origin may  be waived, provided that the importation does not form part of one or more importations that may reasonably be considered to have been undertaken or arranged for the purpose of avoiding the submission of proof of origin.

      Article 4.28 Supporting Documents

The documents referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 4.16 (Procedure for the Issuance of Certificate of Origin) and paragraph 3 of Article 4.21 (Conditions for Invoice Declaration) used for the purpose of proving that products covered by a Certificate of Origin or an invoice declaration can be considered as products originating in Turkiye  or in Malaysia and fulfil the other requirements of this Chapter may consist, inter alia, of the following:

(a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain the goods concerned, contained for example in his accounts or internal bookkeeping;

(b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in Turkiye or in Malaysia;

(c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in Turkiye or Malaysia, issued or made out in Turkiye or in Malaysia; and/or

(d) Certificate of Origin or invoice declarations proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in Turkiye or in Malaysia in accordance with this Chapter.

Article 4.29
Preservation of Proof of Origin and Supporting Documents

1. The exporter applying for the issue of a Certificate of Origin shall keep for at least three years the documents referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 4.16 (Procedure for the Issuance of Certificate of Origin).

2. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall keep for at least three years a copy of this invoice declaration as well as the documents referred to paragraph 3 of Article 4.21 (Conditions for Invoice Declaration).

3. The competent authorities of the importing Party shall keep for at least three years the Certificate of Origins and the invoice declarations submitted to them.

          Article 4.30 Discrepancies and Formal Errors

1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the  proof of origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the products may not ipso facto render the proof of origin null and void if it is duly established that this document does correspond to the products submitted.

2. Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof of origin should not cause this document to be rejected if these errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements made in this document.

Article 4.31
Amounts Expressed in USD or EUR

1. For the application of the provisions of subparagraph 1(b) of Article 4.21 (Conditions for Invoice Declaration) and Article 4.27 (Exemption from Proof of Origin) in cases where products are invoiced in a currency other than USD or EUR, amounts in the national currencies of Turkiye and of Malaysia equivalent to the amounts expressed in USD or EUR shall be fixed annually by each of the countries concerned.

2. A consignment shall benefit from the provisions of subparagraph 1(b) of Article
4.21 (Conditions for Invoice Declaration) or Article 4.27 (Exemption from Proof of Origin) by reference to the currency in which the invoice is drawn up, according to the amount fixed by the country concerned.

3. The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in that currency of the amounts expressed in USD or EUR as at the first working day of October and shall be applied from 1 January the following year. The Parties shall communicate the amounts to each other by 15 October.

4. Turkiye or Malaysia may round up or down the amount resulting from the conversion into its national currency of an amount expressed in USD or EUR. The rounded-off amount may not differ from the amount resulting from the conversion by more than 5%. Turkiye or Malaysia may retain unchanged its national currency equivalent of an amount expressed in USD or EUR if, at the time of the annual adjustment provided for in paragraph 3, the conversion of that amount, prior to any rounding-off, results in an increase of less than 15% in the national currency equivalent. The national currency equivalent may be retained unchanged if the conversion would result in a decrease in that equivalent value.

5. The amounts expressed in USD or EUR shall be reviewed by the Joint Committee at the request of Turkiye or of Malaysia. When carrying out this review, the Joint Committee shall consider the desirability of preserving the effects of the limits concerned in real terms. For this purpose, it may decide to modify the amounts expressed in USD or EUR.


SECTION 4-F
ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION

Article 4.32 Mutual Assistance

1. Each Party shall inform the other Party of the names and addresses of its respective Competent Authorities to issue the Certificate of Origin and verify the proofs of origin, and shall provide the official seals used by the said authorities. Any change in names, addresses, specimen signatures or official seals shall be promptly informed in the same manner.

2. In order to ensure the proper application of this Chapter, Turkiye and Malaysia shall assist each other, through the competent customs administrations and relevant competent and duly authorised bodies, in checking the authenticity of the Certificate  of Origin or the invoice declarations and the correctness of the information given in these documents.

         Article 4.33 Verification of Proof of Origin

1. The Competent Authority of the importing Party may verify the eligibility of a good for preferential tariff treatment in accordance with its domestic laws, regulations or administrative practices.
2. If the Competent Authority of the importing Party has reasonable doubts as to the authenticity or accuracy of the information included in the Certificate of Origin or other documentary evidence, it may:

(a) institute retroactive checking measures to establish the validity of the Certificate of Origin or other documentary evidence of origin;

(b) request information from the relevant importer of a good for which preferential tariff treatment was claimed; or

(c) issue written requests to the Issuing Authority of the exporting Party for information from the exporter or producer.

3. The Competent Authority of the exporting Party shall provide the information requested under paragraph 2 within a period of 90 days from the date the written request is made.

4. The reply of the Competent Authority of the exporting Party must indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether the products concerned can be considered as products originating in Turkiye or Malaysia and fulfil the other requirements of this Chapter.

5. If the reply does not have the necessary details in paragraph 4, the Competent Authority of the importing Party shall provide written advice as to whether the goods are eligible for preferential tariff treatment to the exporting Party within 90 days from the receipt of reply of the exporting Party. The exporting Party shall provide a reply within 90 days from the date of the written advice to the importing Party to make the final decision.

6. If there is no reply from the Competent Authority of the exporting Party within 90 days under paragraph 3 or if there is no reply from the Competent Authority of the exporting Party within 180 days according to paragraph 5 or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the products, the Competent Authority of the importing Party shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.

Article 4.34
Suspension of Preferential Tariff Treatment

1. The Customs Authorities of the importing Party may suspend preferential tariff treatment to goods that are the subject of an origin verification action under this Chapter for the duration of that action or any part thereof.

2. The Customs Authorities of the importing Party may release the goods to the importer subject to any administrative measures deemed necessary, provided that they are not held to be subject to import prohibition or restriction and there is no suspicion of fraud.

3. In the event that a determination is made by the Competent Authority of the importing Party that the goods qualify as the originating goods of the exporting Party, the preferential tariff treatment shall be implemented.
Article 4.35 Penalties

Penalties shall be imposed, in accordance with domestic laws and regulations, on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a document which contains false information for the purpose of obtaining a preferential treatment for products.

SECTION 4-G FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 4.36
Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin

1. A Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin shall be set up under the Joint Committee to assist it in carrying out its duties and to ensure a continuous information and consultations process between experts.

2. The functions of the Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin shall include:
(a) monitoring of the implementation and administration of this Chapter;
(b) discussion of any issues that may arise in the course of implementation;
(c) discussion of any proposed amendments of the rules of origin under this Chapter;
(d) consultation on issues relating to rules of origin and administrative cooperation; and
(e) discussion on any issues that may arise in relation to the verification under Article 4.33 (Verification of Proof of Origin) which cannot be settled between the competent authorities responsible for carrying out the verification.

Article 4.37
Transitional Provisions for Goods in Transit and Storage

Originating goods which are in the process of being transported from the exporting Party to the importing Party, or which are in temporary storage in a bonded area in the importing Party, should be accorded preferential tariff treatment if they are imported into the importing Party on or after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, subject to the submission of a Certificate of Origin issued retrospectively, within 12 months of that date, to the Customs Authority of the importing Party and subject to domestic laws, regulations or administrative practices of the importing Party.

    Article 4.38 Review and Appeal

The importing Party shall grant the right of appeal in matters relating to the eligibility for preferential tariff treatment to importers of goods traded or to be traded between the Parties, in accordance with its domestic laws, regulations and administrative practices.

CHAPTER 5
CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND COOPERATION

Article 5.1 Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) ensure predictability, consistency and transparency in the application of customs laws and regulations of the Parties;

(b) promote efficient, economical administration of customs procedures, and the expeditious clearance of goods;

(c) simplify customs procedures; and

(d) promote cooperation between the customs administrations of the Parties.

Article 5.2 Scope

This Chapter applies, in accordance with the Parties' respective laws, regulations and policies, to customs procedures applied to goods traded between the Parties.

Article 5.3 Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) customs law means such laws and regulations administered and enforced by the Customs Authority of each Party concerning the importation, exportation, and transit/transhipment of goods, as they relate to customs duties, charges, and other taxes, or to prohibitions, restrictions, and other similar controls with respect to the movement of controlled items across the boundary of the customs territory of each Party;

(b) customs procedures means the treatment applied by the customs administration of each Party to goods, which are subject to customs law.

Article 5.4
Customs Procedures and Facilitation

1. Each Party shall ensure that its customs procedures and practices are predictable, consistent, transparent, and facilitate trade, including through the expeditious clearance of goods.

2. Customs procedures of the Parties shall, where possible and to the extent permitted by their respective customs laws, conform to the standards and recommended practices of the World Customs Organisation.

3. The customs administration of each Party shall review its customs procedures with a view to their simplification to facilitate trade.

    Article 5.5 Risk Management

1. The Parties shall administer customs procedures so as to facilitate the clearance of low-risk goods and focus on high-risk goods. To enhance the flow of goods across their borders, the customs administrations shall regularly review these procedures.

2. Where a customs administration deems that the inspection of goods is not necessary to authorise clearance of the goods from customs control, it shall endeavour to provide a single point for the documentary or electronic processing of those goods.

Article 5.6 Advance Rulings

1. Each Party, through its customs administration or other relevant authorities, to the extent permitted by their domestic laws, regulations and administrative determinations, on the application of a person referred in subparagraph 2(a), shall provide in writing advance rulings in respect of the tariff classification.

2. Where available, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for advance rulings, which shall:

(a) provide that an importer in its territory may apply for an advance ruling before the importation of goods in question;

(b) require that an applicant for an advance ruling provide a detailed  description of the goods and all relevant information needed to process an application for an advance ruling;

(c) provide that its customs administration may, at any time during the course of an evaluation of an application for an advance ruling, request that the applicant provide additional information within a specified period;

(d) provide that any advance ruling be based on the facts and circumstances presented by the applicant, and any other relevant information in the possession of the decision maker; and

(e) provide that an advance ruling be issued to the applicant expeditiously, within the period specified in each Party's domestic laws, regulations or administrative determinations.

3. A Party may reject requests for an advance ruling where the additional information requested by it in accordance with subparagraph 2(c) is not provided within a specified time.

4. Subject to paragraphs 1 and 5 and where available, each Party shall apply an advance ruling to all importations of goods described in that ruling imported into its territory for the period as specified in that Party's domestic laws, regulations or administrative determinations.

5. A Party may modify or revoke an advance ruling where there is a determination that the advance ruling was based on an error of fact or law (including human error), the information provided is false or inaccurate, or if there is a change in:

      (a) domestic law;

(b) a material fact; or

      (c) the circumstances, on which the ruling is based.
6. Where an importer claims that the treatment accorded to an imported good should be governed by an advance ruling, the customs administration may evaluate whether the facts and circumstances of the importation are consistent with the facts and circumstances upon which an advance ruling was based.

Article 5.7
Use of Automated Systems

1. The customs administrations, where applicable, shall endeavour to have their own system that supports electronic customs transactions.

2. In implementing initiatives, each customs administration shall take into account the relevant standards and best practices recommended by the World Customs Organisation, taking into consideration the available infrastructures and capabilities of each Party.

      Article 5.8 Customs Cooperation

1. To the extent permitted by their domestic law, the customs administrations of the Parties may, as deemed appropriate, assist each other, in relation to:

(a) the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

(b) developing and implementing customs best practices and risk management techniques;

(c) providing, where possible, prior notice of changes to laws, regulations, and relevant procedures and guidelines that would affect the operation of this Agreement;

(d) simplifying and harmonising customs procedures;

(e) advancing technical skills and the use of technology; and

(f) application of the Agreement on Customs Valuation.

2. Subject to available resources, the customs administrations of the Parties may, as deemed appropriate, explore and undertake cooperation projects, including capacity building programmes to enhance the capability of their customs personnel.

Article 5.9 Transparency

Each Party shall ensure that its customs laws, regulations and general administrative procedures and other requirements, including customs fees and charges, are readily available to all interested parties wherever possible in electronic form.

Article 5.10 Contact Points

Each Party shall designate or maintain one or more contact points to address  inquiries by interested persons concerning customs matters.

Article 5.11 Consultation

The customs administrations of the Parties will encourage consultation with  each other regarding significant customs issues that affect goods traded between the Parties.

Article 5.12 Confidentiality

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require any Party to furnish or allow access to confidential information pursuant to this Chapter the disclosure of which it considers would:

(a) be contrary to the public interest as determined by its legislation;

(b) be contrary to any of its legislation including but not limited to those protecting personal privacy or the financial affairs and accounts of individual customers of financial institutions;

(c) impede law enforcement; or

(d) prejudice legitimate commercial interests, which may include competitive position of particular enterprises, public or private.

2. Where a Party provides information to the other Party in accordance with this Chapter and designates the information as confidential, the Party receiving the information shall maintain the confidentiality of the information, use it only for the purposes specified by the Party providing the information, and not disclose it without the specific written permission of the Party providing the information.




    Article 5.13 Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall ensure that the importers in its territory have access to administrative review within the customs administration that issued the decision subject to review or where applicable, the higher authority supervising the administration and/or judicial review of the determination taken at the final level of administrative review, in accordance with the Party's domestic laws.

2. The decision on appeal shall be given to the appellant and the reasons for  such decision shall be provided in writing.

3. The level of institution to carry out administrative review may include any authority in accordance with the Party's domestic laws.

CHAPTER 6
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

Article 6.1 Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are:

(a) to facilitate bilateral trade in food, plants, animals and products thereof, while protecting human, animal or plant life or health in the territory of each Party;

(b) to deepen mutual understanding of each Party's regulations and procedures relating to consultations on and implementation of sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

(c) to strengthen cooperation between the Parties' competent authorities that have the responsibility for sanitary and phytosanitary matters; and

(d) to provide a means to enhance communication and improve resolution of sanitary and phytosanitary issues.

     Article 6.2 Scope and Coverage

This Chapter applies to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures of a Party that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade between the Parties.

Article 6.3 Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

(b) the definitions in Annex A of the SPS Agreement are incorporated into and made part of this Chapter, mutatis mutandis; and

(c) the relevant definitions developed by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, World Organisation for Animal Health and the International  Plant  Protection Convention shall apply to the implementation of this Chapter.

    Article 6.4 General Provisions

1. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each  other under the SPS Agreement.

2. With a view to facilitating and increasing bilateral trade, the Parties shall seek  to enhance their cooperation in the area of sanitary and phytosanitary measures and deepen their mutual understanding and awareness of their respective systems.

3. The Parties shall seek to identify initiatives for cooperation on regulatory  issues, such as bilateral recognition of equivalence, harmonisation based on international standards, guidelines and recommendations, or other cooperative arrangements.

4. The Parties shall, upon request, enter into consultations with the aim of achieving bilateral and multilateral agreements on recognition of the equivalence of specified sanitary or phytosanitary measures.

Article 6.5
Sub-Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The Parties hereby establish a Sub-Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (hereinafter referred to as "the Sub-Committee on SPS Measures") comprising representatives of each Party who have responsibility for sanitary and phytosanitary matters. The Sub-Committee on SPS Measures shall report to the Joint Committee of its activities.

2. The Sub-Committee on SPS Measures shall provide a forum for:

(a) consulting on matters related to the development or application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures that affect, or may affect, trade between the Parties;

(b) coordinating technical cooperation programmes on sanitary and phytosanitary matters;

(c) enhancing bilateral understanding on issues and agendas for meetings of the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the WTO and the other relevant international organisations referred to in the SPS Agreement, including specific implementation issues thereof;

(d) reviewing progress on addressing sanitary and phytosanitary matters that may arise between the Parties' competent authorities that are responsible for such matters; and

(e) discussing matters with a view to reaching a consensus related to consultation procedure referred to in subparagraph (a).

3. The Sub-Committee on SPS Measures shall meet in a period no later than one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement. The rules of procedure of the Sub-Committee on SPS Measures shall be determined in its first meeting.

4. The Sub-Committee on SPS Measures shall inform the Joint Committee about the rules of procedure.

5. The Sub-Committee on SPS Measures shall meet on the request of either Party. By mutual agreement, ad hoc working groups may be established if necessary.



Article 6.6

Competent Authorities and Contact Points

1. The Competent Authorities and the Contact Points responsible for the implementation of the measures referred to in this Chapter are listed in Annex 6-1.

2. The Parties shall inform each other of any significant changes in the structure, organisation and division of the competency of its Competent Authorities and Contact Points.

Article 6.7 Cooperation

1. The Parties shall explore opportunities for further cooperation,  collaboration and information exchange on sanitary and phytosanitary matters of mutual interest consistent with the provisions of this Chapter. Such opportunities include technical assistance, capacity building and facilitation of market access for products of interest.

2. The Parties agree to cooperate to facilitate the implementation of this Chapter.

    Article 6.8 Dispute Settlement

Neither Party may have recourse to the dispute settlement mechanism provided for in Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement) for any disputes or differences arising from this Chapter.

            CHAPTER 7 TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE

Article 7.1 Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to increase and facilitate bilateral trade, by preventing and eliminating unnecessary obstacles to trade and enhancing bilateral cooperation in accordance with the rights and obligations of the Parties with respect to the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and its Annexes (hereinafter referred to as "TBT Agreement").

     Article 7.2 Scope and Coverage

1. Except as provided in paragraphs 2 and 3, this Chapter applies to all standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade in goods between the Parties.

2. This Chapter does not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures which are covered by Chapter 6 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures).

3. This Chapter does not apply to purchasing specifications prepared by governmental bodies for production or consumption requirements of such bodies.

           Article 7.3 Reaffirmation of TBT Agreement

The Parties reaffirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other under the TBT Agreement.

      Article 7.4 International Standards

1. The Parties reconfirm their obligations under Article 4.1 of the TBT Agreement to ensure that the standardising bodies of the Parties accept and comply with the Code of Good Practice for the Preparation and Adoption of Standards in Annex 3 to the TBT Agreement, and also have regard to the principles set out in Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the Committee since 1 January 1995, G/TBT/1/rev.11,
16 December 2013, Annex B (Decision of the Committee on Principles for the Development of International Standards, Guides and Recommendations with relation to Articles 2, 5 and Annex 3 of the Agreement), issued by the TBT Committee of the WTO.

2. The Parties shall use relevant international standards, guides and recommendations as a basis for technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures in accordance with Articles 2.4 and 5.4 of the TBT Agreement.

Article 7.5
Equivalence of Technical Regulations

Consistent with the TBT Agreement, each Party shall give positive consideration to accepting as equivalent, technical regulations of the other Party, even if these regulations differ from its own, provided that those technical regulations produce outcomes that are equivalent to those produced by its own technical regulations in meeting its legitimate objectives and achieving the same level of protection.

    Article 7.6 Trade Facilitation

1. The Parties shall work cooperatively in the fields of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures with a view to facilitating trade between the Parties.

2. To this end, the Parties shall seek to identify trade facilitating bilateral initiatives regarding standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment  procedures that are appropriate for particular issues or sectors. Such initiatives may include:

(a) cooperation on regulatory issues, such as convergence or equivalence of technical regulations and standards;

(b) alignment with international standards;

(c) reliance on a supplier's declaration of conformity;

(d) use of accreditation to qualify conformity assessment bodies; and

(e) cooperation through recognition of conformity assessment procedures.

Article 7.7
Conformity Assessment Procedures and Accreditation

1. The Parties recognise that a broad range of mechanisms exist to facilitate the acceptance of the results of conformity assessment procedures conducted in the territory of the other Party, including:

(a) voluntary arrangements between conformity assessment bodies from each Party's territory;

(b) agreements on mutual acceptance of the results of conformity assessment procedures with respect to specified regulations conducted by bodies located in the other Party's territory;

(c) unilateral recognition by one Party of the results of conformity assessments procedures performed in the other Party's territory;

(d) accreditation procedures for qualifying conformity assessment bodies and promotion of the recognition of accreditation and certification bodies under international mutual recognition arrangements;

(e) government designation of conformity assessment bodies;

(f) reliance on a supplier's declaration of conformity, where appropriate; and

(g) use of regional and international multilateral recognition agreements and arrangements which the Parties are party to.

2. Having regard to paragraph 1, the Parties undertake:

(a) to intensify their exchange of information on these and similar mechanisms with a view to facilitating the acceptance of conformity assessment results;

(b) to exchange information on conformity assessment procedures, and in particular on the criteria used to select appropriate conformity assessment procedures for specific products;

(c) to exchange information on accreditation policy, and to consider how to make best use of international standards for accreditation, and international agreements involving the Parties' accreditation bodies, for example, through the mechanisms of the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation  and the International Accreditation Forum; and

(d) in line with Article 5.1.2 of the TBT Agreement, to require conformity assessment procedures that are not more strict than necessary.

3. In consideration of the recognition of the broad range of mechanisms to facilitate the acceptance of the results of a conformity assessment procedure and to enhance confidence in the continued reliability of each other's conformity assessment results, the Parties may consult on matters such as the technical competence of the conformity assessment bodies involved.

4. Each Party shall accredit, approve, license, or otherwise recognise conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the other Party on terms no less favourable than those it accords to conformity assessment bodies in its territory, to the extent of each other's obligations under International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation and the International Accreditation Forum.

Article 7.8 Transparency

1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of transparency in decision-making, including providing a meaningful opportunity for persons to provide comments on proposed technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures. Where  a Party publishes a notice under Article 2.9 or 5.6 of the TBT Agreement, it shall:

(a) include in the notice a statement describing the objective of the proposed technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure and the rationale for the approach the Party is proposing; and

(b) transmit the proposal electronically to the other Party through the enquiry point the Party has established under Article 10 of the TBT Agreement at the same time as it notifies WTO Members of the proposal pursuant to the TBT Agreement.

Each Party should allow at least 60 days after it transmits a proposal under subparagraph (b) for the public and the other Party to make comments in writing on the proposal.

2. Where a Party makes a notification under Article 2.10 or 5.7 of the TBT Agreement, it shall at the same time transmit the notification to the other Party electronically through the enquiry point referenced in subparagraph 1(b).

3. Upon request, a Party shall provide the other Party information regarding the objective of, and rationale for, a standard, technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure that it has adopted or is proposing to adopt.

      Article 7.9 Technical Cooperation

With a view to fulfilling the objectives of this Chapter, the Parties shall, upon request  of either Party and where possible, cooperate towards:

(a) exchanging information on legislation, regulations, rules and  other materials and periodicals published by the national bodies responsible for technical regulations, standards, conformity assessment, metrology and accreditation;

(b) exchanging general information and publications on conformity assessment, certification bodies, including notified bodies, designation and accreditation of conformity assessment bodies;

(c) providing technical advice, information and assistance on mutually agreed terms and conditions and exchanging experience to enhance the other Party's system for standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, and related activities;

(d) increasing the information exchange, particularly regarding non-compliance of a product in bilateral trade with relevant technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures of a Party;

(e) examining the compatibility and/or equivalence of their respective technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures;

(f) giving favourable consideration, on request of the other Party, to any sector specific proposal for further cooperation;

(g) promoting and encouraging bilateral cooperation between respective organisations, public and/or private, of the Parties responsible for standardisation, testing, certification, accreditation and metrology;

(h) increasing their bilateral cooperation in the relevant international organisations and fora dealing with the issues covered by this Chapter; and

(i) informing the other Party, as far as possible, about the agreements or programs subscribed at international level in relation to TBT issues.

Article 7.10
Sub-Committee on Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment Procedures

1. The Parties hereby establish a Sub-Committee on Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment Procedures (hereinafter referred to as "Sub- Committee on TBT Matters"), comprising representatives of each Party.

2. For purposes of this Article, the Sub-Committee on TBT Matters shall be coordinated by:

(a) in the case of Turkiye, Directorate General for Product Safety and Inspection, Ministry of Economy, or its successor; and

(b) in the case of Malaysia, the Department of Standards Malaysia, Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation or its successor.

3. In order to facilitate the communication and ensure the proper functioning of  the Sub-Committee on TBT Matters, the Parties will designate a contact point no  later than two months following the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

4. The functions of the Sub-Committee on TBT Matters shall include:

(a) monitoring the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) promptly addressing any issue that a Party raises related to the development, adoption, application or enforcement of technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

(c) enhancing cooperation in the development and improvement of technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

(d) exchanging information on standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, in response to all reasonable requests for such information from a Party;

(e) facilitating cooperation in the area of specific technical regulations by referring enquiries from a Party to the appropriate regulatory authorities;

(f) where appropriate, facilitating sectoral cooperation among governmental and non-governmental conformity assessment bodies in the Parties' territories;

(g) exchanging information on developments in non-governmental, regional, and multilateral fora engaged in activities related to standardisation, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

(h) consulting on any matter arising under this Chapter upon a Party's request;

(i) reviewing this Chapter in light of any development under the TBT Agreement and developing recommendations for amendments to this Chapter in light of those developments;

(j) reporting to the Joint Committee on the implementation of this Chapter as it considers appropriate; and

(k) taking any other steps the Parties consider will assist them in implementing the TBT Agreement and in facilitating trade in goods between them.

5. The Sub-Committee on TBT Matters shall meet at least once a year, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties. By mutual agreement, ad hoc working groups may be established if necessary.

6. The rules of procedures of the Sub-Committee on TBT Matters shall be mutually agreed by the Parties. The Sub-Committee on TBT Matters shall inform the Joint Committee about its rules of procedure.

Article 7.11 Information Exchange

Any information or explanation provided upon request of a Party pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be provided in print or in electronic form within a reasonable period of time agreed between the Parties.

Article 7.12 Dispute Settlement

Neither Party may have recourse to the dispute settlement mechanism provided for in Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement) for any disputes and differences arising from this Chapter.

CHAPTER 8 TRADE REMEDIES

       SECTION 8-A BILATERAL SAFEGUARDS

Article 8.1 Definitions

For the purposes of this Section:

(a) domestic industry means, with respect to an imported product, the producers as a whole of the like or directly competitive product or those producers whose collective production of the like or directly competitive product constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic production of such product;

(b) provisional measure means a provisional bilateral safeguard measure described in Article 8.5 (Provisional Measures);

(c) safeguard measure or safeguard measures means a transitional bilateral safeguard measure or measures described in Article 8.2 (Application of Safeguard Measures);

(d) serious injury means a significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic industry;

(e) threat of serious injury means serious injury that is clearly imminent and shall be determined on the basis of facts and not merely on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility; and

(f) transition period, in relation to a particular product, means the period from the entry into force of this Agreement until two years after the date on  which the customs duty on that product is to be eliminated in accordance with Annex 3-1.

Article 8.2
Application of Safeguard Measures

During the transition period, if as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty pursuant to this Agreement, an originating product of a Party is being imported into the other Party's territory in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or  relative to domestic production, and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic industry producing like or directly competitive products, the other Party may, to the extent necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and facilitate adjustment, apply a safeguard measure consisting of:

(a) the suspension of the further reduction of any rate of customs duty  provided for under this Agreement on the originating product from the date on which the action to apply the safeguard measure is taken; or

(b) an increase of the rate of customs duty on the originating product to a level

not to exceed the lesser of:

(i) the MFN applied rate of customs duty in effect on the date on  which the action to apply the safeguard measure is taken; or

(ii) the MFN applied rate of customs duty in effect on the day immediately preceding the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 8.3
Scope and Duration of Safeguard Measures

1. A Party shall apply a safeguard measure for such period of time as may be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment. A Party may apply a safeguard measure for an initial period of no longer than two years. The period of a safeguard measure may be extended by up to one year provided that the conditions of this Chapter are met and that the safeguard measure continues to be applied to the extent necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and that there is evidence that the industry is adjusting. The total period of a safeguard measure, including any extensions thereof, shall not exceed three years.

2. Regardless of its duration or whether it has been subject to extension, a safeguard measure on a product shall terminate at the end of the transition period for such product. No new safeguard measure may be applied to a product after the end of the transition period.

3. In order to facilitate adjustment in a situation where the proposed duration of a safeguard measure is over one year, the Party applying the safeguard measure shall progressively liberalise it at regular intervals during the application of the safeguard measure, including at the time of any extension.

4. A Party shall not apply a safeguard or provisional measure again on the same originating product.

5. An investigation shall be promptly terminated without any bilateral safeguard measure being applied if imports of the originating good represent less than eight %  of total imports.

6. A Party shall not apply a safeguard or provisional measure on an originating product that is subject to a measure that the Party has applied pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards (hereinafter referred to as the "Safeguards Agreement"), or the WTO Agreement on Agriculture or Article VI of  GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of GATT 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the "Anti-dumping Agreement").

7. When a Party intends to apply, pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement, or the WTO Agreement on Agriculture or Article VI of GATT 1994 and the Anti-dumping Agreement, a measure on a product to which a safeguard measure is being applied, it shall terminate the safeguard measure prior to the imposition of the action to be applied pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement, or the WTO Agreement on Agriculture or Article VI of GATT 1994 and the Anti-dumping Agreement.

8. On the termination of a safeguard measure, the Party that applied the measure shall apply the rate of customs duty in effect as set out in its Tariff Schedule as specified in Annex 3-1 on the date of termination as if the safeguard measure had never been applied.

Article 8.4 Investigation

1. A Party may apply or extend a safeguard measure only following an investigation by the Party's competent authorities in accordance with the same procedures as those provided for in Articles 3 and 4.2 of the Safeguards Agreement.

2. The investigation shall include reasonable public notice to all interested parties and public hearings or other appropriate means in which importers, exporters and other interested parties could present evidence and their views, including the opportunity to respond to the presentations of other parties and to submit their views, inter alia, as to whether or not the application of a safeguard measure would be in the public interest.

3. An investigation shall as far as possible be completed within 180 days after being initiated but in no case shall exceed one year. A Party shall prior to the 180th day notify the other Party of the expected duration of the investigation, if the investigation is likely to take more than 180 days to complete. Upon completion of an investigation, the competent authorities shall promptly publish a report setting forth their findings and reasoned conclusions reached on all pertinent issues of fact and law.

4. Each Party shall ensure the consistent, impartial and reasonable administration of its laws, regulations, decisions and rulings relating to all safeguard investigation proceedings.

5. Each Party shall adopt or maintain equitable, timely, transparent and effective procedures for safeguard investigation proceedings.

Article 8.5 Provisional Measures

1. In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage which would be difficult to repair, a Party may apply a provisional measure, which shall take the form of the measure set out in paragraphs (a) or (b) of Article 8.2 (Application of Safeguard Measures), pursuant to a preliminary determination that there is clear evidence that increased imports of an originating product of the other Party as a result of the reduction or elimination of a duty pursuant to this Agreement have caused or are threatening to cause serious injury.

2. The duration of a provisional measure shall as far as possible not exceed 120 days, but shall not extend beyond 200 days, during which period the pertinent requirements of Articles 8.1 (Definitions) to 8.4 (Investigation) shall be met. The duration of any such provisional measure shall be counted as part of the total period referred to in Article 8.3 (Scope and Duration of Safeguard Measures).

3. Any additional customs duties collected as a result of such provisional measure

shall be promptly refunded if the subsequent investigation referred to in Article 8.4 (Investigation) does not determine that increased imports of an originating product of the other Party have caused or threatened to cause serious injury to a domestic industry. In such a case, the Party that applied the provisional measure shall apply the rate of customs duty set out in its Tariff Schedule in Annex 3-1 as if the provisional measure had never applied.

         Article 8.6 Notification and Consultation

1. A Party shall promptly notify the other Party, in writing, upon:

(a) initiating an investigation under Article 8.4 (Investigation);

(b) making a finding of serious injury or threat thereof caused by increased imports of an originating product of the other Party as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty on the product pursuant to this Agreement;

(c) taking a decision to apply or extend a safeguard measure, or to apply a provisional measure; and

(d) taking a decision to progressively liberalise a safeguard  measure previously applied.

2. A Party shall provide to the other Party a copy of the public version of the  report of its competent authorities required under paragraph 1 of Article 8.4 (Investigation) immediately after it is available.

3. In the written notice referred to in paragraph 1(a), the reason for the initiation of the investigation, a precise description of an originating product subject to the investigation and its subheading or more detailed level of the HS, the period subject to the investigation and the date of initiation of the investigation shall be included.

4. In notifying under paragraphs 1(b) and (c), the Party applying or extending a safeguard measure shall also provide evidence of serious injury or threat thereof caused by increased imports of an originating product of the other Party as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty pursuant to this Agreement; a precise description of the product involved and its subheading or more detailed level of the HS; the details of the proposed safeguard measure; and the date of introduction, duration and timetable for progressive liberalisation of the measure, if such timetable  is applicable. In the case of an extension of a safeguard measure, evidence that the domestic industry concerned is adjusting shall also be provided. Upon request, the Party applying or extending a safeguard measure shall to the extent possible provide additional information as the other Party may consider necessary.

5. A Party proposing to apply or extend a safeguard measure shall provide adequate opportunity for prior consultations with the other Party, with a view to, inter alia, reviewing the information provided under paragraph 4, exchanging views on the safeguard measure and reaching an agreement on compensation as set forth in paragraph 1 of Article 8.7 (Compensation).

6. Where a Party applies a provisional measure referred to in Article 8.5 (Provisional Measures), on request of the other Party, consultations shall be initiated immediately after such application.

7. The provisions on notification in this Article shall not require a Party to disclose confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.

Article 8.7 Compensation

1. A Party proposing to apply a safeguard measure shall, in consultation with the other Party, provide to the other Party mutually agreed trade compensation in the  form of substantially equivalent concessions during the period of application of the safeguard measure. Such consultations shall begin within 30 days of the decision to apply the safeguard measure and, in accordance with paragraph 5 of Article 8.6 (Notification and Consultation), shall take place prior to the application of the safeguard measure.

2. If the Parties are unable to reach agreement on compensation within 30 days  of the commencement of the consultations, the exporting Party shall be free to suspend the application of substantially equivalent concessions to the trade of the Party applying the safeguard measure.

3. A Party shall notify the other Party in writing at least 30 days before  suspending concessions under paragraph 2.

4. The right of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall not be exercised for the first two years during which a bilateral safeguard measure is in effect, provided that the measure has been taken as a result of an absolute increase in imports.

    Article 8.8 Dispute Settlement

1. Neither Party may have recourse to the dispute settlement  mechanism provided for in Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement). Any issue, difference or dispute between the Parties concerning the interpretation, implementation or application of any of the provisions of this Section shall be settled amicably through consultation  and negotiation between the Parties pursuant to Article 8.6 (Notification and Consultation).

2. Any issue, difference or dispute between the Parties in respect of this Section, which cannot be resolved by the Parties pursuant to paragraph 1, shall be referred to the Joint Committee.



     SECTION 8-B GLOBAL SAFEGUARDS

Article 8.9

Global Safeguards

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement, and any other relevant provisions in the WTO Agreement, and their successors.

2. This Agreement does not confer any additional rights or obligations on the Parties with regard to actions taken pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement, and their successors.

3. Chapter 11 (Institutional Provisions) and Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement) shall not apply to this Section.


SECTION 8-C
ANTI-DUMPING MEASURES

Article 8.10 General Provisions

1. The Parties maintain their rights and obligations under Article VI of GATT 1994 and the Anti-Dumping Agreement.

2. Except otherwise stipulated in this Section, this Agreement does not confer any additional rights or obligations on the Parties with regard to the initiation and conduct of dumping investigations as well as the application of anti-dumping measures, referred to in paragraph 1.

Article 8.11 Lesser Duty

If a Party takes a decision to impose anti-dumping duties on the condition that the level of anti-dumping duty is sufficient to remove the injury, that Party is expected to impose a duty lesser than the dumping margin.

Article 8.12
Recommendations of the WTO Committee on Anti-Dumping Practices

Each Party may, in all investigations conducted against goods from the other Party, take into account the recommendations of the WTO Committee on Anti-Dumping Practices.

Article 8.13 Notification

1. After the initiation of an anti-dumping investigation, the initiating Party shall provide the notification required by Article 12.1.1 of Anti-Dumping Agreement in writing as soon as possible to the other Party.

2. The Parties shall make the notifications under Article 5.5 of Anti-Dumping Agreement and cover letters related to mentioned notifications in English.

Article 8.14 Contact Point

1. Both Parties shall make the required notifications referred to under Article 8.13 (Notification) to investigating authorities in addition to the Embassies.

2. In case of any dispute regarding the date of the notification related to paragraph 1, the notification date sent to the Embassies is deemed as binding.

Article 8.15 Dispute Settlement

Chapter 11 (Institutional Provisions) and Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement) shall not apply to this Section.


SECTION 8-D
COOPERATION IN PREVENTING CIRCUMVENTION

     Article 8.16 Areas of Cooperation

1. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in preventing circumvention of trade remedies. The areas of cooperation are as follows:

(a) forwarding questionnaires and other documents to interested parties;

(b) exchanging information about firms and whole sector;

(c) exchanging trade data and similar information regarding products under circumvention investigation; and

(d) any other possible areas to be mutually agreed by the Parties.

2. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require the other Party to furnish  or allow access to confidential information pursuant to this Chapter the disclosure of which it considers would:

(a) be contrary to the public interest as determined by its laws;

(b) be contrary to any of its laws, including but not limited to, to those protecting personal data or financial affairs and accounts of individual customers of financial institution;

(c) impede law enforcement; and

(d) prejudice legitimate commercial interests, which may include competitive position of particular enterprises, public or private.

3. Where a Party provides information to the other Party in accordance with this Section and designates the information as confidential, the Party receiving the information  shall  maintain  the  confidentiality of  the  information,  use  it  only for the

purposes specified by the Party providing the information, and not disclose it without specific written permission of the Party providing the information.

4. Chapter 11 (Institutional Provisions) and Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement) shall not apply to this Section.


SECTION 8-E COUNTERVAILING MEASURES

Article 8.17 Countervailing Measures

1. Each Party shall retain its rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.

2. Chapter 11 (Institutional Provisions) and Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement) shall not apply to this Section.


SECTION 8-F COOPERATION

Article 8.18 Cooperation

1. The Parties shall explore opportunities for cooperation, collaboration and information exchange which is of mutual interest, consistent with the provisions of this Chapter. Such opportunities include technical assistance, capacity building and development of training programmes related to the administration of the trade remedy laws.

2. The Parties agree to cooperate to facilitate the implementation of this Chapter.

CHAPTER 9
ECONOMIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION

Article 9.1 Objectives

1. Without prejudice to the provisions of the existing agreements between the Parties in the fields of the trade, economic and technical cooperation, the Parties agree to establish a framework for cooperation as a means to expand and enhance the benefits of this Agreement to promote capacity building activities in areas of mutual interest.

2. The Parties will establish close cooperation, inter alia, at:

(a) promoting and enhancing economic and technical cooperation in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations between them;

(b) complementing existing and building new cooperative relationships  between them;

(c) advancing human resources development, creating new opportunities for trade and investment, promoting competitiveness and innovation including the involvement, where appropriate, of their private sectors;

(d) contributing to the important role of their private sectors in promoting and building strategic alliances to encourage mutual economic growth and development;

(e) encouraging the presence of each other's goods, services and investments in their respective markets; and

(f) increasing and deepening the level of cooperation activities between them in areas of mutual interest.

Article 9.2 Scope

1. The Parties shall exert their best efforts to:

(a) focus on areas likely to bring the economies of the Parties closer;

(b) encourage capacity building and training programmes, which would assist in creating the necessary institutions and human resources for implementation of this Agreement;

(c) encourage joint-ventures, joint-investments and other forms of  collaboration amongst their private sectors;

(d) promote joint marketing and promotion of the Parties' products and services in both countries' markets and third countries' markets.

2. The cooperation under the scope of this Agreement shall primarily involve, but not limited to the following areas referred in detail between Articles 9.3 to 9.17 of this Chapter:

(a) services;

(b) investment promotion;

(c) small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs);

(d) trade development;

(e) agriculture and food industry;

(f) transportation;

(g) tourism;

(h) environment;

(i) research, development and innovation;

(j) intellectual property;

(k) health;

(l) energy;

(m) halal related areas;

(n) electronic commerce; and

(o) automotive.

3. The Parties may extend cooperation to other areas not covered by the provisions of this Chapter such as but not limited to education and human capital development, communications, science and technology.

4. Cooperation activities may include but not limited to:

(a) exchange of information;

(b) dialogues, conferences and seminars;

(c) development of joint research programs;

(d) encouraging private sector cooperation;

(e) technical, administrative and regulatory assistance; and

(f) encouragement of reciprocal participation in fairs and exhibitions.

5. Areas of cooperation may be developed through existing or new arrangements.

       Article 9.3 Cooperation in Services

1. Recognising the growing importance of services in the development and growth of their economies, and in compliance with the WTO General Agreement on Trade in Services (the "GATS") and within the bounds of their own fields of competence, the Parties will encourage the cooperation with each other in services sectors.

2. The Parties will determine the mutually beneficial sectors on which cooperation will concentrate. Cooperation will be aimed at promoting the productivity and competitiveness in services sector.

3. The Parties, considering the potential and capacities of their respective construction and construction related services shall explore opportunities of cooperation between their companies in Turkiye and Malaysia, as well as in the third countries.

4. The Parties will encourage exchange of information on markets and activities in the respective fields between their private sectors.

Article 9.4
Cooperation in Investment Promotion between the Parties

The Parties recognise the importance of promoting investment and technology flows as a means of achieving economic growth and development. Without prejudice to the provisions of "Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Turkiye and the Government of Malaysia for Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments", the Parties agree to cooperate on, inter alia:

(a) discussing effective ways on investment promotion activities and capacity building;

(b) facilitating the provision and exchange of investment information including laws, regulations and policies to increase awareness of investment opportunities;

(c) encouraging and supporting investment promotion activities of each Party or their business sectors; and

(d) encouraging the establishment of joint ventures or any form of collaborations between their private sectors with a view to promote investment in third countries.

Article 9.5
Cooperation between Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises

With the view to further enhance trade and economic activities, the Parties shall give priority to promoting business and investment opportunities as well as joint ventures between their SMEs. Within this context, the Parties shall, inter alia:

(a) establish networking opportunities for Malaysian and Turkish SMEs to facilitate collaboration and exchange of experience, such as in the field of technology transfers, product quality improvements, supply chain linkages, access to financing for SMEs and technical assistance;

(b) facilitate investments between Malaysia and Turkiye;

(c) share experience and improve understanding of each other's policies and operations through visits and discussions by government officials and professionals from Malaysia and Turkiye;

(d) collaborate in assisting capacity building of high skilled workers and technicians such as in construction and construction related services, innovation, research and development, IT and manufacturing sectors;

(e) exchange expertise on entrepreneurship, management, research and management centres, quality and production standards;

(f) encourage relevant agencies to discuss and cooperate closely, especially in promoting the skills and development of workers and strengthen the dialogue between relevant institutions; and

(g) promote entrepreneurial networks of SMEs of respective countries, support cooperation between respective Chambers/Unions of Commerce/Industry and encourage establishment of networks among their appropriate entities that provide assistance to SMEs.

            Article 9.6 Cooperation in Trade Development

Cooperation in trade development shall primarily focus on:

(a) developing, diversifying and increasing trade between the Parties and improving their competitiveness on domestic, regional and international markets;

(b) enhancing cooperation in customs and origin matters including vocational training in the customs field;

(c) promoting cooperation between business associations in both countries and encouraging their business circles to participate in fairs  and exhibitions;


(d) developing capacity building, human resources and professional skills in the field of trade and related services in both public and private sectors;

(e) exchanging experts and information on:

(i) laws, regulations and best practices in relation to bilateral trade  and investment;

(ii) best practices and methodologies for the development of manufacturing industries and free trade zone practices of the Parties; and

(iii) standardisation, conformity assessment, metrology and accreditation;

(f) promoting and facilitating the participation of consulting and contracting engineering companies, construction and construction related services in each other's development projects; and

(g) encouraging regional cooperation for the development of trade and trade- related infrastructure and services in third countries.

Article 9.7
Cooperation in Agriculture and Food Industry

Taking into account the importance of cooperation in agriculture and food industry for enhancement of bilateral economic and commercial relations, the Parties shall cooperate on, inter alia, the following fields:

(a) exchange of information, expertise and experts relating to agriculture and food industry;

(b) organisation of trainings, seminars, conferences and meetings;

(c) encouragement of establishment of joint activities;

(d) encouragement of trade and marketing of agricultural products as well as the investment on production and processing of agricultural products in both countries and third countries; and

(e) promotion of transfer of technology and know-how in agro-industry and food industry.

          Article 9.8 Cooperation in Transportation

1. The Parties shall, to the extent possible, promote cooperation between enterprises, organisations and authorities, operating in the fields of land, maritime and air transport for the purposes of enhancing bilateral trade.

2. The Parties shall exchange information and expertise on logistics related to international trade.

       Article 9.9 Cooperation in Tourism

The Parties shall cooperate on:

(a) encouraging cooperation between private and public tourism organisations, associations or unions;

(b) sharing of information on tourism opportunities, exhibitions, conventions and publications;

(c) exchanging of expertise and best practices in the field of tourism; and

(d) strengthening cooperation on tourism training.

        Article 9.10 Cooperation in Environment

1. The work programme for environmental cooperation in areas of common global or domestic concern may include, among others:

(a) climate change;

(b) biodiversity and conservation of natural resources;

(c) management of hazardous chemicals;

(d) air quality;

(e) water management;

(f) waste management;

(g) marine and coastal ecological conservation and pollution control;

(h) strategic environmental impact assessment;

(i) management of water and sewerage systems;

(j) mining practices and mines rehabilitation; and

(k) improvement of environmental awareness.

2. The Parties agree to designate contact points for better implementation of this Article.

Article 9.11
Cooperation in Research, Development and Innovation

Cooperation in research, development and innovation will be realised through cooperation activities in sectors where mutual and complementary interests exist. Where possible, the Parties shall also encourage partnerships to develop innovative products and services as well as activities to promote linkage, innovation and technology exchange.

            Article 9.12 Cooperation in Intellectual Property

1. The Parties agree to cooperate, according to their own capabilities and subject to the laws, regulations and policies on matters related to the practice, promotion, dissemination, management, protection and effective application of intellectual property rights, the prevention of abuse of such rights, the fight against counterfeiting and piracy, and the establishment and strengthening of national organisations for control and protection of such rights.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, intellectual property rights refer to copyright and related rights, rights in trademarks, geographical indications, industrial designs, patents, layout designs of integrated circuits, and rights in plant varieties as defined and described in the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.

Article 9.13 Cooperation in Health

1. The Parties shall, to the extent possible, cooperate on:

(a) maternal and child health and reproductive healthcare services;

(b) sharing information on pharmaceuticals;

(c) sharing information on medicine training and practices and communication channel building between relevant drug regulatory authorities of the  Parties;

(d) sharing information on food safety;

(e) sharing information and exchange of expertise in nutrition; and

(f) sharing information, expertise and best practices on healthcare travel.

2. The Parties will determine to work on any other areas or forms of cooperation in health and medicine to be mutually agreed upon.

Article 9.14 Cooperation in Energy

1. The Parties confirm that energy constitutes one of the possible fields of cooperation between the two countries. Therefore, the Parties agree on:

(a) exchanging information on improvement in energy use effectiveness;

(b) encouraging public and private sector cooperation; and

(c) promoting the use of alternate energy sources and renewable energy.

2. The Parties, considering the potential and capacities of their energy sectors, shall explore opportunities of cooperation between their companies in Turkiye and Malaysia, as well as in third countries.

3. The Parties may explore cooperation opportunities in the fields of mining and mineral fuels.

           Article 9.15 Cooperation in Halal Related Areas

The Parties shall cooperate to encourage promotion of Halal best practices. To this end, the Parties shall:

(a) share and exchange information, experience and expertise in relation to Halal best practices, methodologies, reference materials and research findings; and

(b) cooperate in specialised Halal related activities, trade events, conferences and seminars.

Article 9.16
Cooperation on Electronic Commerce

1. The Parties recognise the importance of electronic commerce to facilitate trade opportunities in various sectors. The private sector of both Parties should lead in the development of electronic commerce and in establishing business practices.

2. The Parties should avoid imposing unnecessary restrictions on electronic commerce. Government actions, when needed, should be transparent.

3. The Parties, according to their own capabilities shall work together to support the development of electronic commerce in the future through:

(a) encouraging bilateral discussions at experts level on issues regarding electronic commerce; and

(b) exchanging experiences and sharing best practices on electronic commerce related issues.

        Article 9.17 Cooperation in Automotive

The Parties shall encourage cooperation between enterprises in the automotive  sector to enhance, inter alia, the exchange of technical experts and sharing of knowledge and technology. The areas and forms of cooperation shall be determined by the enterprises and related organisations.

Article 9.18
Sub-Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, the Parties hereby establish the Sub-Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation.

2. The Sub-Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation shall be:

(a) comprised of representatives of the Parties and may, by consensus, invite representatives of relevant entities other than the Governments with the necessary expertise relevant to the issues to be discussed; and

(b) co-chaired by officials of the Parties.

3. The Sub-Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation shall be coordinated by:

(a) in the case of Malaysia, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry or its successor; and

(b) in the case of Turkiye, Ministry of Economy or its successor.

4. In order to ensure the proper functioning of the Sub-Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation, each Party shall designate a contact point no later than one month from the date of entry into force of this Agreement. Each Party will notify the other Party promptly of any change of contact point.

5. The Sub-Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation shall:

(a) establish its working procedures;

(b) establish its work programme within four months from the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

(c) identify and discuss cooperative activities which might be undertaken under this Chapter;

(d) review and monitor the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

(e) exchange information on the field of cooperation;

(f) undertake any other functions within the context of this Chapter to foster cooperation including establishing working groups as the Parties may agree; and

(g) report periodically to the Joint Committee the results of its meetings.

6. The Sub-Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation shall convene its inaugural meeting within one year after the entry into force of this Agreement and subsequently meet at a venue and time to be agreed by the Parties.

7. The Sub-Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation may establish a working group for each field of cooperation under the Sub-Committee. The working groups shall meet at a venue and time to be agreed by the working groups.

Article 9.19 Financial Provisions

Any cooperation activity envisaged or undertaken under this Chapter shall be subject to the availability of resources and to the laws, regulations and policies of the Parties. Costs of cooperation activities shall be borne in such manner as may be mutually determined by the Parties.

Article 9.20 Dispute Settlement

Neither Party may have recourse to the dispute settlement mechanism provided for in Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement) for any disputes or differences arising from this Chapter.

CHAPTER 10 TRANSPARENCY

Article 10.1 Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

Administrative ruling of general application means an administrative ruling or interpretation that applies to all persons and fact situations and that is relevant to the implementation of this Agreement but does not include:

(a) a determination or ruling made in administrative or quasi-judicial proceedings that applies to a particular person, good, or service of the  other Party in a specific case; or

(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or practice.

Article 10.2 Publication

1. Each Party shall exert its best efforts to ensure, wherever possible in electronic form, that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published or otherwise made available in such a manner as to enable interested persons of the other Party to become acquainted with them.

2. Where possible, each Party shall, in accordance with its domestic law:

(a) publish in advance any measure referred to in paragraph 1 that it proposes to adopt; and

(b) provide, where appropriate, interested persons and parties with a reasonable opportunity to comment on such proposed measures on their request.

        Article 10.3 Administrative Proceedings

With a view to administering in a consistent, impartial and reasonable manner all measures affecting matters covered by this Agreement and without prejudice to its domestic law, each Party shall ensure in its administrative proceedings applying measures referred in paragraph 1 of Article 10.2 (Publication) to particular persons, goods, or services of the other Party in specific cases that:

(a) wherever possible, persons of the other Party that are directly affected by a proceeding are provided reasonable notice, in accordance with domestic procedures, when a proceeding is initiated, including a description of the nature of the proceeding, a statement of the legal authority under which the proceeding is initiated, and a general description of any issues in question;

(b) such persons are afforded a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of their positions prior to any final administrative action, when time, the nature of the proceeding, and the public interest permit; and

(c) its procedures are in accordance with domestic law.

    Article 10.4 Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall, where warranted, establish or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial, or administrative tribunals, or procedures for the purposes of the prompt review and correction of final administrative actions regarding matters covered by this Agreement, other than those taken for prudential reasons. Such tribunals shall be independent of the office or authority entrusted with administrative enforcement and shall not have any substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall, in accordance with its domestic law, ensure that in any such tribunals or procedures, the parties to the proceedings are provided with the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and

(b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided for in its domestic law that such decision shall be implemented by, and shall govern the practice of, the offices or authorities with respect to the administrative action at issue.

      Article 10.5 Exchange of Information

1. Upon request and to the extent possible, each Party shall promptly provide information and reply to any question from the other Party of any proposed or actual measure that materially affects the operation of this Agreement or otherwise substantially affects the other Party's interests under this Agreement.

2. Any request or information under this Article shall be conveyed to the other Party through contact points.

3. Any information provided under this Article shall be provided normally within 60 days and shall be without prejudice as to whether the measure is consistent with this Agreement.

4. In the case of any inconsistency between the provisions of this Article and provisions relating to transparency in other Chapters, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 10.6 Contact Points

1. In order to facilitate communication between the Parties on any trade matter covered by this Agreement, the Parties hereby establish the following contact points:

(a) for the Republic of Turkiye: Ministry of Economy, or its successor; and

(b) for Malaysia: Ministry of International Trade and Industry, or its successor.

2. On the request of either Party, the contact point of the other Party shall indicate the office or official responsible for the matter and provide the required support to facilitate communication with the requesting Party. Each Party shall notify the other Party of any changes of its contact point in due time.

        CHAPTER 11 INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 11.1
Joint Economic and Trade Council

A Joint Economic and Trade Council is hereby established which shall be co-chaired by Ministers in charge of foreign trade and meet at least once in every two years in accordance with the conditions laid down in its rules of procedure.

Article 11.2
Duties of the Joint Economic and Trade Council

The Joint Economic and Trade Council shall review the progress made in the implementation of this Agreement. It shall also examine any major issues arising within the framework of this Agreement including its economic and social impact and any other bilateral or international issues of mutual interest.

Article 11.3
Procedures of the Joint Economic and Trade Council

1. The Joint Economic and Trade Council shall consist of senior officials of the Parties. The Joint Economic and Trade Council may invite private sector representatives to its meetings upon its approval.

2. The Joint Economic and Trade Council shall establish its rules of procedures and financial arrangements.

3. The Joint Economic and Trade Council may take decisions on any matter related to this Agreement subject to the respective internal legal procedures of the Parties. The Joint Economic and Trade Council may also make recommendations on matters related to this Agreement.

4. The Joint Economic and Trade Council shall take decisions and make recommendations by the consensus of the Parties.

Article 11.4 Joint Committee

1. Subject to the powers of the Joint Economic and Trade Council, a Joint Committee is hereby established, in which each Party shall be represented by its senior officials. The Joint Economic and Trade Council may delegate to the Joint Committee, in full or in part, any of its powers.

2. For the objective of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the functions of the Joint Committee shall include, but not be limited to:

(a) review the implementation and operation of this Agreement;

(b) explore ways to enhance trade between the Parties and to further the objectives of this Agreement, including the possibility of further removal of restrictions to trade;

(c) establish sub-committees or working groups as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks and address specific issues;

(d) review, consider and, as appropriate, decide on specific matters related to the operation and implementation of this Agreement, including matters reported by sub-committees and working groups;

(e) supervise and coordinate the work of sub-committees and working groups established under this Agreement and call on technical experts on any matter falling within its functions;

(f) take decisions in the matters related to this Agreement, including decisions to adopt any amendment to this Agreement. The Joint Committee may also make recommendations to matters related to this Agreement. The Joint Committee shall take decisions and make recommendations by the consensus of the Parties. The decisions taken by the Joint Committee, including on any amendment to this Agreement shall be subject to the completion of the respective internal legal ratification procedures of the Parties;

(g) adopt any decisions and recommendations of the sub-committees where necessary;

(h) facilitate, as appropriate, the avoidance and settlement of disputes arising under this Agreement; and

(i) carry out any other functions as the Parties may agree.


3. The Joint Committee shall establish its rules and procedures.

4. The Joint Committee shall convene its inaugural meeting within one year after the entry into force of this Agreement. Its subsequent meetings shall be held at such frequency as the Parties may agree upon. Special meetings of the Joint Committee may be convened, as mutually agreed by both Parties, within 30 days upon the request of either Party. The Joint Committee shall convene alternately in Malaysia  and Turkiye, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

   Article 11.5 Sub-Committees

 1. The following sub-committees established under this Agreement are subject to the powers of the Joint Committee:

(a) Sub-Committee on Trade in Goods;

(b) Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin;

(c) Sub-Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures;

(d) Sub-Committee on Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment Procedures; and

(e) Sub-Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation.

2. The sub-committees may set up ad hoc working groups to deal with specific issues referred to them by the Joint Committee. Other procedures and functions of the sub-committees are to be specified in the individual Chapters where they are established.

     CHAPTER 12 DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Article 12.1 Objective

The objective of this Chapter is to provide an effective and efficient process for consultations and settlement of disputes arising under this Agreement and to arrive at, where possible, a mutually agreed solution.

     Article 12.2 Scope and Coverage

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply to the settlement of disputes between the Parties regarding the  interpretation  and application of this Agreement.

2. Subject to Article 12.3 (Choice of Forum), this Chapter is without prejudice to the rights of the Parties to have recourse to dispute settlement procedures available under other agreements to which they are Parties.

Article 12.3 Choice of Forum

1. Where a dispute regarding the same matter arises under this Agreement and under another agreement to which the disputing Parties are party, the complaining Party may select the dispute settlement procedure in which to settle the dispute.

 2. The complaining Party shall notify the other Party in writing of its intention to select a particular forum before doing so.

3. Once the complaining Party has requested a Panel under an agreement referred to in paragraph 1, the forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of the other.

Article 12.4 Consultations

1. Each Party shall accord adequate opportunity for consultations with the other Party with respect to any matter affecting the interpretation and application of this Agreement. Such matters shall as far as possible be settled through consultation between the Parties.

2. The request for consultations shall be in writing. The request shall include the reasons for the request, including the identification of the measure at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the complaint, and provide sufficient information to enable an examination of the matter. A copy of the request for consultations shall be delivered to the Joint Committee. The Party to which the request is made shall reply  to the request in writing within 10 days after the date of its receipt, and shall enter into consultations within a period of no more than:

(a) 15 days after the date of receipt of the request for matters concerning

perishable goods; or

(b) 30 days after the date of receipt of the request for all other matters.

3. The Parties shall make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory resolution of any matter through consultations. Upon initiation of consultations, the Parties shall:

(a) provide sufficient information to enable a full examination of how the matter might affect the operation and application of this Agreement; and

(b) treat any confidential information designated as such by the other Party providing the information.

4. The complaining Party may request the Party complained against to make available for the consultations personnel of its government agencies or other regulatory bodies who have expertise in the matter under consultations. Consultations shall take place in the territory of the Party complained against, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

5. Consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further proceedings.

Article 12.5
Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation

1. The Parties may at any time agree to good offices, conciliation or mediation. They may begin and be terminated at any time.

2. If the Parties agree; good offices, conciliation or mediation may continue while the dispute proceeds for resolution before an Arbitration Panel.

3. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation and mediation and positions taken by the Parties during these proceedings shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of either Parties in any further proceedings.

Article 12.6
Request for the Establishment of an Arbitration Panel

1. The Complaining Party may request in writing for the establishment of an Arbitration Panel, if:

(a) the Party complained against does not enter into consultations within 30 days after the date of its receipt of the request for consultations under Article 12.4 (Consultations);

(b) the Parties fail to resolve a dispute 30 days after the date of receipt of the request for consultations regarding a matter concerning perishable goods; or

(c) the Parties fail to resolve a dispute 60 days after the date of receipt of the request for consultations regarding any other matter.

2. The request to establish an Arbitration Panel shall identify:

(a) the specific measures at issue;

(b) the legal basis of the complaint including the provisions of this Agreement alleged to have been breached or any other relevant provisions; and

(c) the factual basis for the complaint.

3. The establishment of an Arbitration Panel shall not be requested on any matter relating to a proposed measure.

    Article 12.7 Terms of Reference

Unless the Parties otherwise agree within 20 days from the date of receipt of the request for the establishment of the Arbitration Panel, the terms of reference of the Arbitration Panel shall be:

"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of an Arbitration Panel pursuant to Article 12.6 (Request for the Establishment of an Arbitration Panel), to make findings of law and fact and determinations on whether the measure is not in conformity with the Agreement and to issue a written report for the resolution of the dispute. If the Parties agree, the Arbitration Panel may make recommendations for resolution of the dispute."

Article 12.8
Composition and Establishment of Arbitration Panel

1. An Arbitration Panel shall consist of three arbitrators. Each Party shall appoint one arbitrator, who may be its national, within 30 days of the date of the receipt of the request for the establishment of the Arbitration Panel.

2. The Parties shall agree on and appoint the third arbitrator, who shall be the chairperson of the Arbitration Panel, within 45 days of the date of receipt of the request for the establishment of the Arbitration Panel. If the chair of the Arbitration Panel has not been designated by the Parties within 15 days of the appointment of  the second arbitrator, the two arbitrators appointed in accordance with paragraph 1 shall designate by common agreement the third arbitrator who shall chair the Panel. If the chair of the Arbitration Panel has not been designated by the arbitrators within 30 days of the appointment of the second arbitrator, either Party may request  the Director General of the WTO to appoint the third arbitrator to chair the Arbitration Panel. In the event where the Director General of the WTO is not able to appoint the third arbitrator, for any reason, within 45 days, the Parties to the dispute shall consult each other in order to jointly appoint the third arbitrator within a further period of 30 days. During this consultation, the Parties shall take into consideration the indicative list of governmental and non-governmental panellists established by the WTO.

3. The date of establishment of an Arbitration Panel shall be the date on which  the last arbitrator is appointed.

4. All arbitrators shall have specialised knowledge or experience in law, international trade or other matters relating to this Agreement or in the resolution of disputes arising under international trade agreements. They shall be independent, serve in their individual capacities and not be affiliated with, nor take instructions from any Party or organisation related to this dispute and shall comply with Annex 12-1 of this Agreement.

5. The chair of the Arbitration Panel shall not be a national of a Party, nor have  his or her usual place of residence in the territory of a Party and not be employed by either Party or have dealt with the matter in any capacity.

6. Where a Party considers that an arbitrator does not comply with the requirements of Code of Conduct, the Parties shall consult and, if so agreed, they  shall replace that arbitrator in accordance with paragraph 7.

7. If an arbitrator appointed under this Article becomes unable to participate in the proceeding or resigns or is to be replaced according to paragraph 6, a successor shall be selected within 10 days in the same manner as prescribed for the appointment of the original arbitrator and the successor shall have all the powers and duties of the original arbitrator. The work of the Arbitration Panel shall be suspended for a period beginning on the date the arbitrator becomes unable to participate in the proceeding, resigns, or is to be replaced according to paragraph 6. The work of the Arbitration Panel shall resume on the date the successor is appointed.

Article 12.9
Functions and Proceedings of the Arbitration Panel

1. The function of an Arbitration Panel is to make an objective assessment of the matter before it, including an examination of the facts of the case and the applicability of and conformity with this Agreement, and make such other findings and rulings necessary for the resolution of the dispute referred to it.

2. Arbitration Panels shall interpret this Agreement in accordance with customary rules of interpretation of public international law.

3. Arbitration Panel meetings shall be closed to the public, unless the Parties decide otherwise.

4. The Parties shall be given the opportunity to provide at least one written submission and to attend any of the presentations, statements or rebuttals in the proceedings. All information or written submissions submitted by a Party to the Arbitration Panel, including any comments on the interim report and responses to questions put by the Arbitration Panel, shall be made available to the other Party.

5. A Party asserting that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with this Agreement shall have the burden of establishing such inconsistency. A Party asserting that a measure is subject to an exception under this Agreement shall have the burden of establishing that the exception applies.

6. The Arbitration Panel should consult with the Parties as appropriate and provide adequate opportunities for the development of a mutually satisfactory resolution.

7. The Arbitration Panel shall take its decisions by consensus. In the event where the Arbitration Panel is unable to reach a consensus, it may take its decisions by majority vote.

8. On request of a Party or on its own initiative and subject to such terms and conditions as the Parties may agree within 10 days of the date of establishment of the Arbitration Panel, the Arbitration Panel may seek information from any relevant source and may consult experts to obtain their opinion or advice on certain aspects of the matter. The Arbitration Panel shall provide the Parties with a copy of any advice or opinion obtained and an opportunity to provide comments. Where the Arbitration Panel takes the information or technical advice into account in the preparation of its report, it shall also address any comments by the Parties on the information or technical advice.

9. The deliberations of the Arbitration Panel and the documents submitted to it shall be kept confidential.

10. Notwithstanding paragraph 9, either Party may make public statements as to  its own position or submissions regarding the dispute, but shall treat as confidential, information and written submissions submitted by the other Party to the Arbitration Panel which the other Party has designated as confidential. Where a Party has provided information or written submissions designated to be confidential, that Party shall, within 30 days of a request of the other Party, provide a non-confidential summary of the information or written submissions which may be disclosed to the public.

Article 12.10 Expenses

Each Party shall bear the cost of its appointed arbitrator and its own expenses. The cost of the chairperson of an Arbitration Panel and other expenses associated with  the conduct of the proceedings shall be borne by the Parties in equal shares.

      Article 12.11 Arbitration Panel Report

1. The reports of the Arbitration Panel shall be drafted without the presence of the Parties. The Arbitration Panel shall base its reports on the relevant provisions of this Agreement and the submissions and arguments of the Parties, and may take into account any other relevant information provided to the Arbitration Panel in accordance with paragraph 8 of Article 12.9 (Functions and Proceedings of the Arbitration Panel).

2. The Arbitration Panel shall issue to the Parties an initial report setting out the findings of facts, the applicability of the relevant provisions, the basic rationale behind any findings and its conclusions within 90 days of the date of establishment of the Arbitration Panel. Where the Arbitration Panel considers it cannot issue  its  initial report within 90 days, it shall inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the delay together with an estimate of the period within which it will issue its report. Under no circumstances should the initial report be issued later than 120 days after the date of the establishment of the Arbitration Panel.

3. Any Party may submit written comments to the Arbitration Panel on its initial report within 14 days of its issuance. After considering any written comments by the Parties on the initial report, the Arbitration Panel may reconsider its report and make any further examination it considers appropriate.

4. The Arbitration Panel shall issue its final report to the Parties within 120 days of the date of the establishment of the Arbitration Panel. Where the Arbitration Panel considers it cannot issue its final report within 120 days, it shall inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the delay together with an estimate of the period within  which it will issue its report. Under no circumstances should the ruling be issued later than 150 days after the date of the establishment of the Arbitration Panel.

5. The final report shall contain:

(a) the descriptive part summarising the submissions and arguments of the Parties;

(b) the findings of the fact;

(c) the applicability of relevant provisions and the basic rationale behind any findings;

(d) recommendation that the Party complained against bring the measure into conformity with the obligations under this Agreement; and

(e) recommendations, if the Parties agree, on the means to resolve the dispute.

6. The report of the Arbitration Panel shall be final and binding on the Parties.

7. The findings and determinations of the Arbitration Panel and, if applicable, any recommendations cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations of the Parties provided in this Agreement.

8. On matters of urgency, including those regarding perishable goods, the Arbitration Panel shall make every effort to issue its interim and final reports to the Parties within half of the respective time periods under paragraphs 2 and 4. The Arbitration Panel may give a preliminary report on whether a case is urgent.

Article 12.12
Suspension or Termination of Proceedings

1. The Parties may agree that the Arbitration Panel suspend its work at any time for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date of such agreement. In the event  of such a suspension, the time-frames regarding the work of the Arbitration Panel  shall be extended by the amount of time that the work was suspended. If the work of the Arbitration Panel has been suspended for more than 12 months, the authority for establishment of the Arbitration Panel shall lapse unless the Parties agree otherwise. This shall not prejudice the rights of the complaining Party to request at a later stage, the establishment of an Arbitration Panel on the same subject matter.

2. The Parties may agree to terminate the proceedings of the Arbitration Panel by

jointly so notifying the chairperson of the Arbitration Panel at any time before the issuance of the report to the Parties.

Article 12.13 Implementation

1. The Party complained against shall promptly comply with the findings and rulings of the Arbitration Panel. Where it is not practicable to comply immediately, the Party complained against shall comply with the findings and rulings within a reasonable period of time. The reasonable period of time shall be mutually  determined by the Parties, or where the Parties fail to agree on the reasonable period of time within 45 days of the release of the final report of the Arbitration Panel referred to in Article 12.11 (Arbitration Panel Report), either Party may refer the matter to an Arbitration Panel, which shall determine the reasonable period of time following consultation with the Parties.

2. The Party complained against shall notify to the complaining Party the implementing measures that it has taken to comply with the determinations and recommendations, if any, of the Arbitration Panel, before the expiry of the reasonable period of time agreed by the Parties or determined in accordance with paragraph 1.

3. Where there is disagreement between the Parties as to whether the Party complained against eliminated the non-conformity as determined in the report of the Arbitration Panel within the reasonable period of time as determined pursuant to paragraph 2, either Party may refer the matter to an Arbitration Panel.

4. The Arbitration Panel for the purpose of this Article shall be the Arbitration Panel as established under paragraph 2 of Article 12.15 (Review).

Article 12.14
Compensation and Suspension of Benefits

1. If the Party complained against fails to notify the implementing  measures before the expiry of the reasonable period of time, or notifies the complaining Party that it is impracticable, or the Arbitration Panel to which the matter is referred pursuant to paragraph 3 of Article 12.13 (Implementation) rules that the Party complained against has failed to eliminate the non-conformity within the reasonable period of time, the Party complained against shall, if so requested by the complaining Party, enter into negotiations with the complaining Party with a view to reaching mutually satisfactory compensation.

2. If there is no agreement on satisfactory compensation within 20 days of the date of receipt of the request mentioned in paragraph 1, the complaining Party may, by giving notification, suspend benefits conferred on the other Party under this Agreement. Such suspension shall only take effect after 30 days of the notification.

3. The compensation referred to in paragraph 1 and the suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall be temporary measures. Neither compensation nor suspension is preferred to full elimination of the non-conformity as determined in the report of the Arbitration Panel referred to in Article 12.11 (Arbitration Panel Report). The suspension shall only be applied until such time as the non-conformity is fully eliminated or a mutually satisfactory solution is reached.

4. In considering what concessions or other obligations to suspend pursuant to paragraph 2:

(a) the complaining Party should first seek to suspend benefits with respect to the same sector(s) as that affected by the measure or other matter that the Arbitration Panel referred to in Article 12.11 (Arbitration Panel Report) has found to be inconsistent with this Agreement;

(b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not practicable or effective to suspend concessions or other obligations with respect to the same sector(s), it may suspend concessions or other obligations with respect to other sectors. The notification of such suspension pursuant to paragraph 2 shall indicate the reasons on which it is based; and

(c) the level of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall be equivalent to the level of benefits that have been impaired.

Article 12.15 Review

1. Without prejudice to the procedures in Article 12.14 (Compensation and Suspension of Benefits), the Party complained against may request an Arbitration Panel to determine whether the requirements for the suspension of benefits set out in paragraph 2, 3 or 4 of Article 12.14 (Compensation and Suspension of Benefits), have not been met.

2. The Arbitration Panel that is established for the purposes of this Article or Article 12.13 (Implementation) shall have, to the extent possible, as its arbitrators, the arbitrators of the original Arbitration Panel. If this is not possible, then the arbitrators to the Arbitration Panel that is established for the purposes of this Article or Article 12.13 (Implementation) shall be appointed pursuant to Article 12.8 (Composition and Establishment of Arbitration Panel). The Arbitration Panel established under this Article or Article 12.13 (Implementation) shall issue its report to the Parties within 20 days on the reasonable period of time and 45 days on the other issues after the date when the matter is referred to it. When the Arbitration Panel considers that it cannot issue its report within the aforementioned periods, it may extend that period for a maximum of 30 days with the consent of the Parties. The report shall be final and binding on the Parties.

3. If the Arbitration Panel decides that the Party complained against has eliminated the non-conformity, the complaining Party shall promptly reinstate any benefits it has suspended under Article 12.14 (Compensation and Suspension of Benefits). If the Arbitration Panel decides that the level of benefits suspended by the complaining Party is excessive, the complaining Party shall modify the level of suspension of concessions accordingly.

   Article 12.16 Rules of Procedure

1. Dispute settlement procedures under this Chapter shall be governed by Annex 12-2 of this Agreement. Arbitration Panels may, after consulting the Parties, adopt additional rules of procedure not inconsistent with this Agreement.

2. Any time period or other rules and procedures for Arbitration Panels provided for in this Chapter may be modified by mutual consent of the Parties. The Parties may also agree at any time not to apply any provision of this Chapter.

     CHAPTER 13 GENERAL EXCEPTIONS

Article 13.1  General Exceptions

For the purposes of this Agreement, Article XX of GATT 1994 and its interpretive notes (including its footnotes) are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 13.2  Security Exceptions

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a) to require a Party to furnish or allow access to any information the disclosure of which it determines to be contrary to its essential security interests; or

(b) to prevent a Party from taking any actions which it considers necessary for the protection of its essential security interests:

(i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such traffic in other goods and materials or relating to the supply of services as carried on, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of supplying or provisioning a military establishment;

(ii) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations;

(iii) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the  materials from which they are derived; or

(c) to prevent a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security.

2. The Joint Committee shall be informed to the fullest extent possible of measures taken under subparagraphs 1(b) and (c) and of their termination.

       Article 13.3 Disclosure of Information

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require either Party to furnish or allow access to information the disclosure of which it considers:

(a) would be contrary to the public interest as determined by its legislation;

(b) is contrary to any of its legislation, including but not limited to those protecting personal privacy or the financial affairs and accounts of individual customers of financial institutions;

(c) would impede law enforcement; or

(d) would prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.

Article 13.4
Balance-of-Payments Exceptions on Trade in Goods

1. Should a Party decide to impose measures for balance-of-payments purposes, it shall do so, only in accordance with its rights and obligations under GATT 1994, including the Declaration on Trade Measures Taken for Balance of Payments Purposes and the Understanding on the Balance of Payments Provisions of the GATT 1994.

2. Any restrictive measures adopted or maintained by a Party or any changes therein, shall be promptly notified to the other Party from the date such measures are taken. The Party adopting or maintaining any restrictive measures under paragraph 1 shall promptly commence consultations with the other Party in order to review the measures adopted or maintained by it.

3. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the application of the restrictive measures referred to in paragraph 1.

4. Nothing in this Agreement shall be regarded as altering the rights enjoyed and obligations undertaken by a Party, as a party to the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, as may be amended.

Article 13.5 Taxation Measures

1. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, the provisions of this Agreement shall not apply to any taxation measures.

2. For the purposes of this Agreement, "taxation measures" means any measures levying direct or indirect taxes, including excise duties and sales tax, as defined by the national laws and regulations of the Parties as long as these taxes are not used for the purpose of protecting the domestic industry of the Party levying the duties.

3. This Agreement shall only grant rights or impose obligations with respect to taxation measures where corresponding rights or obligations are also granted or imposed under the WTO Agreement.

4. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of either Party under any other agreement on taxation measures. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any such agreement on taxation measures, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.


   CHAPTER 14 FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 14.1
Annexes, Appendices, Notes and Footnotes

The Annexes, Appendices, Notes and Footnotes to this Agreement shall constitute an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 14.2
Succession of Treaties or International Agreements

Any reference in this Agreement to any other treaty or international agreement shall be made in the same terms to its successor treaty or international agreement to which a Party is party.

Article 14.3 Evolutionary Clause

1. The Parties may mutually agree to extend this Agreement with the aim of broadening and supplementing its scope to specific sectors or activities in the light of the experience gained during its implementation.

2. The Parties agree to begin negotiations on trade in services one year after the entry into force of this Agreement with a view to progressively liberalise trade in services between them in conformity with Article V of GATS. They also agree to begin exploratory talks on investment one year after the entry into force of this Agreement with a view to include a Chapter on Investment to this Agreement, on a mutually advantageous basis.

Article 14.4 Confidentiality

Where a Party provides information to the other Party in accordance with this Agreement and designates the information as confidential, the other Party shall maintain the confidentiality of the information. Such information shall be used only for the purposes specified, and shall not be otherwise disclosed without the specific permission of the Party providing the information, except to the extent that it may be required to be disclosed in the context of judicial proceedings.

Article 14.5 Amendments

1. This Agreement may be amended in writing by agreement between the Parties.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, amendments relating only to the Annexes to this Agreement may be made through diplomatic notes exchanged between the Parties.

3. Amendments to this Agreement shall be approved by the Parties in accordance with their respective legal procedures, and shall enter into force on the first day of  the

second month following the date on which the Parties exchange written notification that such procedures have been completed, or on a date to be agreed upon by the Parties.

4. Amendments shall not affect the rights and obligations of the Parties provided for under this Agreement until the amendments enter into force.

Article 14.6 General Review

The Parties shall undertake a general review of the Agreement, with a view to furthering its objectives, within two years of the entry into force of this Agreement and at least every five years thereafter.

            Article  14.7 Termination of Existing Agreements

The following Agreements shall be terminated on the date of entry into force of this Agreement:

(a) Trade Agreement between the Republic of Turkiye and Malaysia (signed on 13 February 1977); and

(b) ) Economic and Technical Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Turkiye and the Government of Malaysia (signed on 13 February 1977).

       Article 14.8 Duration and Termination

1. This Agreement shall be valid unless it is terminated.

2. Either Party may give written notice to the other Party of its intention to terminate this Agreement. Termination shall take effect on the first day of the seventh month after the date of the notice of termination.

3. The other Party may request in writing consultations concerning any matter  that would arise from the termination within 45 days after the date of receipt of the notice referred to in paragraph 2.

4. The requested Party shall enter into consultations in good faith with a view to reaching an equitable agreement within 30 days after the date of receipt of the  request referred to in paragraph 3.

Article 14.9 Entry into Force

1. The Parties shall ratify this Agreement in accordance with their domestic legal procedures. The Parties shall exchange written notification upon completion of such procedures.

2. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the date on which the Parties exchange written notification that such procedures have been completed.

Article 14.10 Authentic Texts

This Agreement shall be done in Turkish and English languages, both being equally authentic. In case of divergence, the English text shall prevail.

CHAPTER 15
TRADE IN SERVICES

Article 15.1
Objective and Scope

1. The objectives of this Chapter are to liberalise and facilitate trade in services
between the Parties in conformity with Article V of GATS.

2. This Agreement applies to measures by Parties affecting trade in services adopted
or maintained by central, regional or local governments and authorities, and by non-
governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central, regional or local
governments or authorities.

a. Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations arising from GATS under this
Agreement.

4. This Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting:

national maritime cabotage;
government procurement; and

subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-supported
loans, guarantees and insurance.

5. With respect to air transport services, this Chapter shall not apply to measures
affecting air traffic rights or measures affecting services directly related to the exercise of
air traffic rights, except:
(a) aircraft repair and maintenance services;
selling and marketing of air transport services;
computer reservation system (CRS) services;

ground-handling services; and

airport operation and management services.

Article 15.2
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

aircraft repair and maintenance services means such activities when
undertaken on an aircraft or a part thereof while it is withdrawn from service
and do not include so-called line maintenance;

airport operation and management services means the supply of air
terminal, airfield and other airport infrastructure operation services on a fee
or contract basis. Airport operation services do not include air navigation
services;

commercial presence means any type of business or professional
establishment, including through:

(i) | the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical person; or

(ii) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office,
within the territory of a Party for the purpose of supplying a service;

computer reservation systems (CRS) services means services provided
by computerised systems that contain information about air carriers
schedules, availability, fares and fare rules, through which reservations can
be made or tickets may be issued;

direct taxes comprise all taxes on total income, on total capital or on
elements of income or of capital, including taxes on gains from the alienation
of property, taxes on estates, inheritances and gifts, and taxes on the total
amounts of wages or salaries paid by enterprises, as well as taxes on capital
appreciation;

economic integration agreement means an agreement substantially
liberalising trade in services pursuant to the WTO Agreement, in particular
Articles V and V bis of General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS);

Free Trade Agreement means the Free Trade Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of Turkiye and the Government of Malaysia;

GATS means the General Agreement on Trade in Services, in Annex 1B to
the WTO Agreement;

ground handling services means the supply at an airport, on a fee or
contract basis, of the following: airline representation, administration and
supervision; passenger handling; baggage handling; ramp services; catering
(except the preparation of the food); air cargo and mail handling; fuelling of
an aircraft; aircraft servicing and cleaning; surface transport; and flight
operations, crew administration and flight planning. Ground handling
services do not include self-handling; security; line maintenance; aircraft
repair and maintenance; or management or operation of essential

centralised airport infrastructure such as de-icing facilities, fuel distribution
systems, baggage handling systems, and fixed intra-airport transport
systems;

juridical person means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise
organised under applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether
privately-owned or governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust,
partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship or association;

juridical person of a Party means:

(i) a juridical person set up in accordance with the laws of either Party
respectively, and having its registered office, central administration or
principal place of business in the respective territories of the Parties.
Should the juridical person have only its registered office or central
administration in the territory of either Party, it shall not be considered as

a juridical person of either Party respectively, unless it engages in
substantive business operations in the respective territory of the Parties;
or

in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence, a

_ juridical person owned or controlled by natural persons of either Party,
or by a juridical person of either Party identified under subparagraph (i)
respectively.

A juridical person is:

(i) - owned by persons of either Party if more than 50 per cent of the equity
interest in it is beneficially owned by persons of either Party respectively;

(ii) controlled by persons of either Party if such persons have the power to
name a majority of its directors or otherwise to legally direct its actions;

(ili)  affiliated with another person when it controls, or is controlled by, that
other person; or when it and the other person are both controlled by the
same person;

measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law,
regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action or any other form;

measures by Parties affecting trade in services include measures relating
to:

(i) the purchase, payment or use of a service;
the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a service,

services which are required by the Parties to be offered to the public
generally; and

' Central administration means the head office where ultimate decision-making takes place.

MK b-

(iii) the presence, including commercial presence, of persons of a Party for
the supply of a service in the territory of the other Party;

natural person means a national of either Party according to its respective
legislation;

person means either a natural person or a juridical person;

selling and marketing of air transport services means opportunities for
the air carrier concerned to sell and market freely its air transport services
including all aspects of marketing such as market research, advertising and
distribution. These activities do not include the pricing of air transport
services, nor the applicable conditions;

services includes any service in any sector except a service supplied in the
exercise of governmental authority;

service consumer means any person that receives or uses a service;

service of the other Party means a service which is supplied:

(i) from or in the territory of that other Party, or in the case of maritime
transport, by a vessel registered under the laws of that other Party, or
by a person of that other Party which supplies the service through the
operation of a vessel or its use in whole or in part; or

(ii) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence or
the presence of natural persons, by a service supplier of that other
Party;

service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means any

service which is supplied neither on a commercial basis, nor in competition

with one or more service suppliers;

service supplier means any person that supplies or seeks to supply a
service;

supply of a service includes the production, distribution, marketing, sale
and delivery of a service;

trade in services is defined as the supply of a service:
(i) _ from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party;
(ii) in the territory of a Party to a service consumer of the other Party;

by a service supplier of a Party, through commercial presence in the
territory of the other Party; and

by a service supplier of a Party through presence of natural persons of that Party in the territory of the other Party; and a


traffic rights mean the right for scheduled and non-scheduled services to
operate and/or to carry passengers, cargo and mail for remuneration or hire
from, to, within, or over the territory of a Party, including points to be served,
routes to be operated, types of traffic to be carried, capacity to be provided,
tariffs to be charged and their conditions, and criteria for designation of
airlines, including such criteria as number, ownership and control.

Article 15.3
Market Access

ie With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified in
subparagraph (w) of Article 15.2 (Definitions), each Party shall accord services and
service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less favourable than that provided for
under the terms, limitations and conditions agreed and specified in the specific
commitments contained in Annex 15-5 and Annex 15-6 (Schedule of Specific
Commitments).

2. In sectors where market access commitments are undertaken, the measures
which a Party shall not adopt or maintain either on the basis of a regional subdivision or
on the basis of its entire territory, unless otherwise specified in Annex 15-5 and Annex
15-6 (Schedule of Specific Commitments), are defined as:

(a) limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the form of
numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the
requirement of an economic needs test;

limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the form
of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

limitations on the total number of service operations or on the total quantity
of service output expressed in the terms of designated numerical units in the
form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;?

limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a
particular service sector or that a service supplier may employ and who are
necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific service in the
form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint venture
through which a service supplier may supply a service; and

limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum
percentages limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or
aggregate foreign investment.

2 This subparagraph does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of services.

Article 15.4
National Treatment

a. In the sectors where market access commitments are inscribed in Annex 15-
5 and Annex 15-6 (Schedule of Specific Commitments), and subject to any conditions
and qualifications set out therein, each Party shall accord to services and service
suppliers of the other Party, in respect of all measures affecting the supply of services,
treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own like services and service
suppliers.

2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to services and
service suppliers of the other Party, either formally identical treatment or formally different
treatment to that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.

2: Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less
favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services or service
suppliers of a Party compared to like services or service suppliers of the other Party.

Article 15.5
Additional Commitments

Parties may negotiate commitments with respect to measures affecting trade in services
not subject to scheduling under Articles 15.3 (Market Access) and 15.4 (National
Treatment), including those regarding qualifications, standards and licensing matters.
Such commitments shall be inscribed in a Party's Schedule of Specific Commitments.

Article 15.6
Schedule of Specific Commitments

"1 Each Party shall set out in a schedule the specific commitments it undertakes
under Articles 15.3 (Market Access), 15.4 (National Treatment) and 15.5 (Additional
Commitments). With respect to sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, the
schedule of each Party shall specify:

terms, limitations and conditions on market access;

conditions and qualifications on national treatment;

undertakings relating to additional commitments;

where appropriate, the time-frame for implementation of such commitments;
and

the date of entry into force of such commitments.

3 Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require any Party to
compensate for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of the relevant services or service suppliers.

2. Measures inconsistent with both Articles 15.3 (Market Access) and 15.4 (National
Treatment) shall be inscribed in the column relating to Article 15.3 (Market Access). In
this case, the inscription will be considered to provide a condition or qualification to Article
15.4 (National Treatment) as well.

a. The Parties Schedules of Specific Commitments are set out in Annex 15-5 and
Annex 15-6 (Schedules of Specific Commitments).

Article 15.7
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

1 Without prejudice to measures taken in accordance with Article VII of GATS, and
except as provided for in its List of Most-Favoured-Nation Exemptions contained in Annex
15-7 and Annex 15-8 (List of Most-Favoured-Nation Exemptions), each Party shall
accord immediately and unconditionally, to services and service suppliers of the other
Party treatment no less favourable than the treatment it accords to like services and
service suppliers of any non-party.

A Treatment granted under other existing or future agreements concluded by a Party
and notified under Article V or Article Vbis of GATS shall not be subject to paragraph 1.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, if a Party enters into an agreement of the type
referred in the paragraph 2 it shall, upon request from the other Party, afford adequate
opportunity to that Party to negotiate the benefits granted therein.

4. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be so construed as to prevent a Party from
conferring or according advantages to adjacent countries in order to facilitate exchanges
limited to contiguous frontier zones of services that are both locally produced and
consumed.

Article 15.8
Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers

i Each Party shall ensure that any monopoly supplier of a service in its territory does
not, in the supply of the monopoly service in the relevant market, act in a manner
inconsistent with that Partys obligations under Article 15.7 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment) and its specific commitments.

2. Where a Partys monopoly supplier competes, either directly or through an affiliated
company, in the supply of a service outside the scope of its monopoly rights and which
is subject to that Party's specific commitments, the Party shall ensure that such a supplier
does not abuse its monopoly position to act in its territory in a manner inconsistent with
such commitments.

3. The provisions of this Article shall also apply to cases of exclusive service suppliers,
where a Party, formally or in effect, authorises or establishes a small number of service
suppliers and substantially prevents competition among those suppliers in its territory.

Article 15.9
Business Practices

Le Parties recognise that certain business practices of service suppliers, other than
those falling under Article 15.8 (Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers), may
restrain competition and thereby restrict trade in services.

2. Each Party shall, at the request of the other Party, enter into consultations with a
view to eliminating practices referred to in paragraph 1. The Party addressed shall accord
full and sympathetic consideration to such a request and shall cooperate through the
supply of publicly available non-confidential information of relevance to the matter in
question. The Party addressed shall also provide other information available to the
requesting Party, subject to its domestic law and to the conclusion of satisfactory
agreement concerning the safeguarding of its confidentiality by the requesting Party.

Article 15.10
Transparency and Confidential Information

1. Each Party shall publish promptly and, except in emergency situations, at the latest
by the time of their entry into force, all relevant measures of general application which
pertain to or affect the operation of this Chapter. International agreements pertaining to
or affecting trade in services to which a Party is a signatory shall also be published.

2. Where publication as referred to in paragraph 1 is not practicable, such information
shall be made otherwise publicly available.

3. Each Party shall exert its best efforts to publish the measures referred to in
paragraph 1, wherever possible, in electronic form.

4. Chapter 10 (Transparency) of this Agreement shall not apply to this Chapter.

5, The Parties, shall respond promptly to all requests by the other Party for specific
information:

on international agreements or arrangements, including on mutual
recognition, which pertain to or affect matters falling under this Chapter; and

on standards and criteria for licensing and certification of service
suppliers, including information concerning the appropriate regulatory or
other body to consult regarding such standards and criteria.

6. Nothing in this Chapter shall require any Party to provide confidential
information, the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be
contrary to the public interests, or which would prejudice legitimate commercial interests
of particular enterprises, public or private.

Article 15.11
Payments and Transfers

al. Except under the circumstances envisaged in Article 15.12 (Restrictions to
Safeguard the Balance of Payments), a Party shall not apply restrictions on international
transfers and payments for current transactions with the other Party relating to its specific
commitments.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of the members
of the International Monetary Fund under the Articles of Agreement of the Fund, including
the use of exchange actions which are in conformity with the Articles of Agreement,
provided that a Party shall not impose restrictions on any capital transactions
inconsistently with its specific commitments regarding such transactions, except under
Article 15.12 or at the request of the Fund.

Article 15.12
Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of Payments

i In the case of trade in services, where a Party is in serious balance of payments
and external financial difficulties or under threat thereof, it may adopt or maintain
restrictions on trade in services on which it has undertaken commitments, including on
payments or transfers for transactions related to such specific commitments.
2. Restrictions adopted or maintained under paragraph 1 shall:

be consistent with the IMF Articles of Agreement as may be amended;

avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic, and financial
interests of the other Party;

not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances described in
paragraph 1;

be temporary and be phased out progressively as the situation specified in
paragraph 1 improves; and

be applied on a non-discriminatory basis such that no Party is treated less
favourably than the other Party or a non-Party.

With respect to trade in services:

(a) it is recognised that particular pressures on the balance of payments of a
Party in the process of economic development or economic transition may
necessitate the use of restrictions to ensure, inter alia, the maintenance of
a level of financial reserves adequate for the implementation of its
programme of economic development or economic transition; and

in determining the incidence of such restrictions, a Party may give priority
to economic sectors which are more essential to its economic or
development programmes. However, such restrictions shall not be adopted
or maintained for the purposes of protecting a particular sector.

4. Any restriction adopted or maintained by a Party under paragraph 1, or any
change thereto, shall be notified promptly to the other Party.

5, A Party adopting or maintaining any restriction under paragraph 1 shall promptly
commence consultations with the other Party that requests consultations in relation to
the restrictions adopted by it, if such consultations are not taking place at the WTO.

Article 15.13
Emergency Safeguard Measures

The Parties take note of the multilateral negotiations on the question of emergency
safeguard measures based on the principle of non-discrimination pursuant to Article X of
GATS. Upon conclusion of such multilateral negotiations, the Parties shall conduct a
review for the purpose of discussing appropriate amendments to this Chapter based on
the results of such multilateral negotiations.

Article 15.14
Modification of Commitments

The Parties shall, upon written request by a Party, hold consultations to consider any
modification or withdrawal of a specific commitment in the requesting Partys Schedule
of Specific Commitments. The consultations shall be held within three months after the
requesting Party made its request. In the consultations, the Parties shall aim to ensure
that a general level of mutually advantageous commitments no less favourable to trade
than that provided for in the Schedule of Specific Commitments prior to such
consultations is maintained. Modifications of schedules are subject to the procedures set
out in Articles 11.4 (Joint Committee) and 14.5 (Amendments) of the Free Trade
Agreement.

Article 15.15
Review of Commitments

With the objective of further liberalisation of trade in services between them, the Parties
commit themselves to review every five years, or otherwise as the Parties agree, their
Schedules of Specific Commitments. The first review shall take place no later than six
years after the entry into force of this Agreement. The Joint Committee shall adopt the
results of the reviews.

Article 15.16
General Exceptions

Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between Parties where
like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on supply of services, nothing in this
Chapter shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by either Party of
measures:

necessary to protect public morals or to maintain public order;
necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not
inconsistent with this Chapter including those relating to:

(i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with the
effects of a default on contracts:

(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing
and dissemination of personal data and the protection of confidentiality
of individual records and accounts; or

(ili) safety;

inconsistent with Article 15.4 (National Treatment), provided that the
difference in treatment is aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective
imposition or collection of direct taxes in respect of services or service
suppliers of the other Party;

inconsistent with Article 15.5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), provided
that the difference in treatment is the result of an agreement on the
avoidance of double taxation or provisions on the avoidance of double
taxation in any other international agreement or arrangement by which the
Party is bound.

4 The public order exception may be invoked only where a genuine and sufficiently serious threat is posed
to one of the fundamental interests of society.

> The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XIV(b) of GATS include environmental
measures necessary to protect human, animal, or plant life or health.

 Measures that are aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or collection of direct taxes
include measures taken by a Party under its taxation system which:

(a) apply to non-resident service suppliers in recognition of the fact that the tax obligation of non-
residents is determined with respect to taxable items sourced or located in the Partys territory;

(b) apply to non-residents in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes in the Party's territory;

(c) apply to non-residents or residents in order to prevent the avoidance or evasion of taxes,
including compliance measures;

(d) apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the territory of the other Party in order to ensure
the imposition or collection of taxes on such consumers derived from sources in the Party's territory;

(e) distinguish service suppliers subject to tax on worldwide taxable items from other service suppliers, in
recognition of the difference in the nature of the tax base between them; or

(f} determine, allocate or apportion income, profit, gain, loss, deduction or credit of resident persons or
branches, or between related persons or branches of the same person, in order to safeguard the
Party's tax base.

Tax terms or concepts in this paragraph and this footnote are determined according to tax definitions and
concepts, or equivalent or similar definitions and concepts, under the law of the Party taking the measure.

Article 15.17
Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed:

(a)

(b)

to require a Party to furnish any information, the disclosure of which it
considers contrary to its essential security interests; or

to prevent a Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for the
protection of its essential security interests:

(i) relating to the supply of services as carried out directly or indirectly for
the purpose of provisioning a military establishment;

(ii) \ relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials from
which they are derived;

(iii) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or
to prevent a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations under
the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and

security.

Article 15.18
Denial of Benefits

A Party may deny the benefits of this Agreement:

(a)

to a service or service supplier of the other Party if the service supplier is a
juridical person, where denying Party establishes that the juridical person is
owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party and the denying Party;

(1) does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non-Party; or

(ii) | adopts or maintains measures with respect to the non-Party or a person
of the non-Party that prohibits transactions with the juridical person or
that would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Agreement

- were accorded to the juridical person.

in the case of maritime transport, if it establishes that the service is supplied
by a vessel registered under the laws of a non-Party and the denying Party
does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non-Party; or by a person
which supplies the service through the operation of a vessel and/or its use in
whole or in part and that person is a person of a non-Party which the denying
Party does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non-Party.

on _ 13/48

Article 15.19
Cooperation

The Parties shall strengthen cooperation efforts in sectors, including sectors which are
not covered by current cooperation arrangements. The Parties shall discuss and agree
in accordance with Article 11.4 (Joint Committee) on the sectors for cooperation and
develop cooperation programme in these sectors in order to improve their domestic
services as well as operations in third markets capacity and their efficiency and
competitiveness.

Article 15.20
Telecommunications

1, The Parties reaffirm their commitments arising from GATS Annex on
Telecommunications.

2. The Parties agree for the provisions of GATS Telecommunications Reference
Paper to be an integral part of this Chapter.

a The Parties shall, upon written request by a Party, hold consultations to consider
the revision of telecommunications provisions under Article 11.4 (Joint Committee)

CHAPTER 16
MOVEMENT OF BUSINESS PERSONS

Article 16.1
Scope and General Provisions

We This Chapter shall apply to measures that affect the entry and temporary stay of
business persons of a Party in the territory of the other Party.

- For the purposes of this Chapter,

business person of a Party means a natural person of a Party who is engaged
in trade in goods, the supply of services or the conduct of investment activities.

3. The Agreement shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking
access to the employment market of a Party, nor shall it apply to measures regarding
citizenship, residence or employment on a permanent basis.

A. The Agreement shall not prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the
entry of natural persons into, or their temporary stay in, its territory, including those
measures necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly movement of
natural persons across, its borders, provided that such measures are not applied in such
a manner as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to the other Party under the terms
inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments.

5, The Parties shall ensure that all measures affecting the entry and temporary stay
of business persons covered by this Chapter are administered in a reasonable, objective
and impartial manner consistent with Article 6.1 of the WTO General Agreement on Trade
in Services (GATS).

Gi The sole fact that a Party grants entry and temporary stay to a natural person of
the other Party shall not be construed to exempt that person from meeting any applicable
licensing or other requirements, including qualification requirements and any mandatory
codes of conduct, to practice a profession.

Article 16.2
Provision of Information

a. For the purposes of this Chapter, each Party shall ensure that its competent
authorities make publicly available the information necessary to apply for authorisations
for the entry into and temporary stay in its territory. Such information shall be made
electronically available and kept updated.

2. Information referred to in paragraph 1 shall include, among others:

categories of visas and work permits or any similar type of authorisation
regarding entry and temporary stay;

documentation and evidence required and conditions to be met;

method of filing and options on where to file, such as consular offices or
online;

processing time;

application fees;

period of validity of the visas and work permits;
conditions for extensions or renewal;

available review and/or appeal procedures;
reference to relevant laws of general application; and

respective requirements referred to in paragraph 9 of Article 16.3 (Entry and
Temporary Stay Related Requirements and Procedures).

3. Each Party shall provide the other Party with details of relevant publications or
websites where information referred to in paragraph 2 is made available.

Article 16.3
Entry and Temporary Stay Related Requirements and Procedures

1. Documents required for the processing of application for entry and temporary stay
of business persons covered by this Chapter shall be relevant and commensurate with
the purpose for which they are collected.

2 Fees for processing applications for entry and temporary stay for the business
persons covered by this Chapter shall be reasonable and determined with regard to the
administrative costs involved.

3. Complete applications shall be processed as expeditiously as possible. The
competent authorities of each Party shall notify the applicant of the outcome of its
application promptly after a decision has been taken. The notification shall include, if
applicable, the period of stay and any other terms and conditions.

4. Upon the applicant's request, the competent authorities of the Party concerned
shall, without undue delay and to the extent possible, provide information concerning the
status of the applicant's application. This information shall normally be provided free of
charge.

5. If a Party requires additional information from an applicant in order to process the
application for temporary stay or in case of an incomplete application, the authority shall
notify the applicant without undue delay and provide the applicant with the opportunity to
supply that additional or missing information or to correct any deficiencies within a
reasonable period of time or submit a new application.

6. If an application is refused, the Party concerned shall inform the applicant, in
writing and without undue delay, about the reasons for such refusal. The applicant shall
be given an opportunity to appeal against that decision and/or to submit a new
application.

f. If a Party requires separate applications for entry and temporary stay it shall
ensure that the respective time periods for entry and temporary stay, if granted, are
compatible.

8. Applicants shall be given an opportunity to apply for renewal or extension of
authorisation for temporary stay. Each Party shall ensure that the procedures for
application for the renewal or extension of authorisation for temporary stay are pre-
established and clearly specified.

9, When a Party decides to grant entry and temporary stay to a business person of
the other Party and when the respective requirements for multiple entry visas are fulfilled,
the granting Party shall issue multiple entry visas.

10. Parties shall endeavour to accept and process applications in electronic format.

Article 16.4
Relationship with other Agreements

In case of an inconsistency between the provisions of this Chapter and a provision of an
international agreement to which the Parties are party, the provision most favourable to
the business person covered by this Chapter shall apply.

? For greater certainty, incomplete applications are not admitted for processing.
8 For greater certainty, in writing may include in electronic form.

CHAPTER 17
E-COMMERCE

SECTION 17-A
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 17.1
Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) promote electronic commerce among the Parties;

{b) facilitate electronic commerce between businesses of Parties;

{c) contribute to creating an environment of trust and confidence in the use of
electronic commerce; and

{d) enhance cooperation among the Parties regarding development of electronic
commerce.

Article 17.2
Scope

As This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party that affect
trade in goods and services by electronic means.

2. The Parties affirm that measures affecting the supply of a service delivered or
performed electronically are subject to the obligations contained in the relevant
provisions of Chapter 15 (Trade in services) which are subject to any exceptions or
limitations and restrictions set out in Annex 15-5 and Annex 15-6 (Schedules of Specific
Commitments) that are applicable to such obligations.
3. This Chapter shall not apply to:

(a) government procurement; and

(b) subsidies or grants provided by a Party including government-supported
loans, guarantees, and insurance.

Article 17.3
Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

{a) consumer means consumer as defined in each Party's national laws;

AL 18 /48

electronic invoicing or e-invoicing means the automated creation,
exchange and processing of a request for payment between a supplier and
a buyer using a structured digital format:

electronic authentication means the process or act of verifying the identity
of a party to an electronic communication or transaction and ensuring the
integrity of an electronic communication;

electronic signature means data in electronic form that is in, affixed to, or
logically associated with an electronic data message that may be used to
identify the signatory in relation to the data message and indicate the
signatory's approval of the information contained in the data message;?

personal data means any information relating to an identified or identifiable
natural person; and

(f) unsolicited commercial electronic message means an_ electronic
message which is sent for commercial or marketing purposes to an electronic
address without the consent of the recipient or against the explicit rejection
of the recipient, using an internet access service supplier and, to the extent

provided for under the domestic laws and regulations of each Party, other

telecommunications service.

SECTION 17-B
BUSINESS AND TRADE FACILITATION

Article 17.4
Paperless Trading

fed With a view to creating a paperless border environment for trade in goods by
electronic means, each Party recognises the importance of eliminating paper forms and
documents required for import, export and transit of goods.

2 Each Party shall make any form issued or controlled by its customs authority for
import, export and transit of goods through its territory available to the public in electronic
format.

a Each Party shall endeavour to make any form issued or controlled by any
government agency other than its customs authority for import, export and transit of
goods through its territory available to the public in electronic format.

4. Each Party shall endeavour to accept any form issued or controlled by customs
authorities and, as appropriate, supporting documentation, required by customs
authorities for import, export, or transit of goods through its territory submitted in
electronic format as the legal equivalent of the paper version of those documents.

 For greater certainty, nothing in this provision prevents a Party from according greater legal effect to an
electronic signature that satisfies certain requirements, such as indicating that the electronic data
messages has not been altered or verifying the identity of the signatory.

a Each Party shall endeavour to accept any form issued or controlled by any
government agency other than customs authorities and, as appropriate, supporting
documentation, required by any government agency other than customs authorities for
import, export, or transit of goods through its territory submitted in electronic format as
the legal equivalent of the paper version of those forms.

6. No Party shall be required to apply paragraphs 4 and 9 if:
(a) there is a domestic or an international legal requirement to the contrary; or

(b) doing so would reduce the effectiveness of the customs or other trade
procedures required for import, export, or transit of goods through its territory.

7. Each Party shall establish or maintain a national single window that enables
persons to submit documentation or data requirements for importation, exportation, or
transit of goods through a single entry point to the participating authorities or agencies.

8. In cases where documentation and/or data requirements have already been
received through the single window, the same documentation and/or data requirements
shall not be requested by participating authorities or agencies except in circumstances
as determined by the Parties under the Joint Committee.

9. The Parties shall endeavour to establish or maintain a seamless, trusted, high
availability? and secure interconnection of their respective single windows to facilitate
the exchange of data relating to forms and documents required for import, export and
transit of goods through its territory as determined by the Parties under the Joint
Committee.

10. The type of data and documents referred to in paragraph 9 shall be jointly
determined by the Parties under the Joint Committee, and upon reaching mutual
consensus, Parties shall publish a list of such documents online.

11. The Parties recognise the role of internationally recognised and, if available, open
standards in the development and governance of the data exchange systems."'!

12. | The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate and collaborate on new initiatives which
promote and advance the use and adoption of systems that facilitate the data exchange
referred to in paragraph 9, including but not limited to, through:

(a) sharing of information, experiences and best practices in the area of
development and governance of the data exchange systems; and

(b) collaboration on pilot projects in the development and governance of data
exchange systems.

'0 For greater certainty, high availability refers to the ability of a single window to continuously operate.
It does not prescribe a specific standard of availability.
1 The Parties recognise that the data exchange systems referred to in this paragraph may refer to

interconnection of the single windows referred to in paragraph 9. FY
20 /48

Lah

Article 17.5
Electronic Invoicing

1. Unless otherwise provided for under its laws or regulations, a Party shall not deny
any legal effect of an electronic invoice solely on the basis that the invoice is in electronic
form.

2. The Parties recognise the importance of e-invoicing which increases the
efficiency, accuracy and reliability of transactions. The Parties also recognise the benefits
of ensuring that the systems used for e-invoicing within their respective jurisdictions are
interoperable with the systems used for e-invoicing in the other Parties jurisdictions.

Kf Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that the implementation of measures related
to e-invoicing in its jurisdiction is designed to support cross-border interoperability. For
that purpose, each Party shall endeavour to take into account international standards,
guidelines or recommendations, where they exist.

4. The Parties recognise the economic importance of promoting the global adoption
of interoperable e-invoicing systems. To this end, the Parties shall endeavour to, where
appropriate, share best practices, discuss technical standards for interoperability and
collaborate on promoting the adoption of interoperable systems for e-invoicing.

Article 17.6
Transparency

VE Each Party shall publish as promptly as possible or, where that is not practicable,
otherwise make publicly available, including on the internet where feasible, all relevant
measures of general application pertaining to or affecting the operation of this Chapter.

a Each Party shall respond as promptly as possible to a relevant request from
another Party for specific information on any of its measures of general application
pertaining to or affecting the operation of this Chapter.

a. Chapter 10 (Transparency) of this Agreement shall not apply to this Chapter.

SECTION 17-C
ESTABLISHING BUSINESS AND CONSUMER TRUST

Article 17.7
Electronic Signatures and Electronic Authentication

1 Except in circumstances otherwise provided for under its law, a Party shall not
deny the legal effect, legal validity, or admissibility as evidence in legal proceedings of
an electronic signature solely on the basis that the signature is in electronic form.

Pr Neither Party shall adopt or maintain measures for electronic authentication that
would:

prohibit parties to an electronic transaction from mutually determining the
appropriate electronic authentication methods, or electronic signature for that

transaction; or

(a)

prevent parties to an electronic transaction from having the opportunity to
establish before judicial or administrative authorities that their electronic
transaction complies with any legal requirements with respect to electronic
authentication or electronic signatures.

a Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require that, for a particular category of
electronic transactions the method of authentication or the electronic signature meets
certain performance standards certified by an accredited authority in accordance with the
Partys laws and regulations.

4. Each Party shall endeavour to facilitate the use of interoperable electronic
authentication and mutual recognition of electronic signatures.

Article 17.8
Unsolicited Commercial Electronic Messages

t Parties recognise the importance of promoting confidence and trust in electronic
commerce, including through transparent and effective measures that limit unsolicited
commercial electronic messages.

2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures regarding unsolicited commercial
electronic messages that:

(a) require suppliers of unsolicited commercial electronic messages to facilitate
the ability of recipients to prevent ongoing reception of those messages;

(b) require the consent, as specified according to the laws and regulations of
each Party, of recipients to receive commercial electronic messages; or

(c) otherwise provide for the minimisation of unsolicited commercial electronic
messages.

a Each Party shall provide recourse against suppliers of unsolicited commercial
electronic messages that do not comply with the measures adopted or maintained
pursuant to paragraph 2.

4. Parties shall endeavour to ensure that commercial electronic messages are
clearly identifiable as such, clearly disclose on whose behalf they are made, and contain
the necessary information to enable recipients to request cessation free of charge and at
any time.

5. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in appropriate cases of mutual concern
regarding the regulation of unsolicited commercial electronic messages.

Article 17.9
Online Consumer Protection

1. The Parties recognise the importance of adopting and maintaining transparent and
effective consumer protection measures for electronic commerce as well as other
measures conducive to the development of consumer confidence.

: Each Party shall provide protection for consumers using electronic commerce that
affords a level of protection which is not lower than that provided for consumers of other
forms of commerce under its relevant laws and regulations.

= Each Party shall adopt or maintain laws or regulations to proscribe fraudulent,
misleading or deceptive conduct that causes harm, or is likely to cause harm, to
consumers engaged in electronic commerce.

4. Each Party shall adopt or maintain laws or regulations that:

require, at the time of delivery, goods and services provided to be of
acceptable and satisfactory quality, consistent with the supplier's claims
regarding the quality of the goods and services; and

in circumstances where requirements in subparagraph (a) are not met,
provide consumers with appropriate redress.

5, Each Party shall make publicly available and easily accessible its consumer
protection laws and regulations.

6. The Parties recognise the importance of improving awareness of, and access to,
policies and procedures related to consumer protection, including consumer redress
mechanisms, including for consumers engaged in electronic commerce.

v: The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation between their respective
national consumer protection agencies or other relevant bodies on matters related to
electronic commerce in order to enhance consumer confidence.

8. The Parties shall promote, as appropriate and subject to the respective laws and
regulations of each Party, cooperation on matters of mutual interest related to fraudulent,
misleading and deceptive conduct, including in the enforcement of their relevant laws
and regulations.

9, The Parties recognise the importance of, and shall encourage service suppliers to
inform consumers about their rights and obligations for e-commerce.

Article 17.10
Personal Data Protection

sic The Parties recognise the economic and social benefits of protecting the personal
data of users of electronic commerce and its contribution to enhancing consumer
confidence in electronic commerce.

2. Each Party shall, in a manner it considers appropriate, protect the personal data
of the users of electronic commerce. Personal data of the users of electronic commerce
can only be shared with the other Party with the consent of the users or in accordance
with the conditions provided under its legislation.

LWA At. 23 /48

Each Party shall:

(a) adopt or maintain a domestic legal framework that provides for the protection
of the personal data of the users of electronic commerce;

exchange information on their experiences in protecting personal data; and

ensure that service providers and intermediary service providers take all
necessary technical and administrative measures for the protection of
personal data.

4. Each Party shall publish information on the personal data protections it provides
to users of electronic commerce, including how:

(a)
(b)

3. Each Party shall encourage enterprises in its territory to publish, including on the
internet, their policies and procedures related to protection of personal data.

individuals can pursue remedies; and

business can comply with any legal requirements.

6. Recognising that the Parties may take different legal approaches to protecting
personal data, each Party should encourage the development of mechanisms to promote
compatibility between these different regimes. These mechanisms may include the
recognition of regulatory outcomes, whether accorded autonomously or by mutual
arrangement, or broader international frameworks. To this end, the Parties shall
endeavour to exchange information on any such mechanisms applied in their jurisdictions
and explore ways to extend these or other suitable arrangements to promote compatibility
between them. -

Article 17.11
Cooperation on Electronic Commerce

1, Recognising the global and inter-connected nature of electronic commerce, the
Parties shall endeavour to:

(a) work together to assist small and medium enterprises to overcome obstacles
encountered in the use of electronic commerce;

(b) exchange information and share experiences on regulations, policies,
enforcement and compliance regarding electronic commerce, including:

(!)
(i!)

personal data protection;

consumer protection;

the treatment of unsolicited commercial electronic messages;

exchanges between private sectors of the Parties regarding business
models and practices in electronic commerce used in their territories;

oh. sits

(v) cybersecurity; and

(vi) any other issues relevant for the development of electronic commerce.

encourage cooperation in the area of transport and logistics services for the
express delivery of goods supplied by e-commerce, including through:

(i) ~ promoting and facilitating partnerships among e-retailers and logistics
players; and

(ii) exchanging information, where possible and practicable including
rates, on express delivery services provided in and from its territory;
and explore ways to enhance cooperation between the national postal services
of Parties.

CHAPTER 18
INVESTMENT

SECTION 18-A

Article 18.1
Scope and Coverage

This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating

investors of the other Party;
covered investments; and

with respect to Article 18.8 (Performance Requirements), all investments in
the territory of the Party.

This Chapter shall not apply to:
any taxation measure unless otherwise provided;
services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority within the territory
of the respective Party. For purposes of this Chapter, a service supplied in
the exercise of governmental authority means any service which is supplied
neither on a commercial basis, nor in competition with one or more service
suppliers;
subsidies or grants provided by a Party, or to any conditions attached to the
receipt or continued receipt of such subsidies or grants, whether or not such
subsidies or grants are offered exclusively to investors of the Party or
investments of investors of the Party, including government-supported loans,
guarantees and insurance; and
government procurement.

Article 18.2
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) claimant means an investor of a Party that is a party to an investment dispute

with the other Party:
AL 26 /48

covered investment means, with respect to a Party, an investment in its
territory, of an investor of the other Party that is in existence as of the date of
entry into force of this Agreement or established, acquired, or expanded
thereafter:

disputing parties means the claimant and the respondent;
disputing party means either the claimant or the respondent;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise constituted or organised under
the law of a Party, and a branch? located in the territory of a Party and
carrying out substantive business activities there;

freely useable currency means any currency as determined by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) under the Articles of Agreement of the
International Monetary Fund and any amendments thereto;

ICSID Arbitration Rules means the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (Arbitration Rules) as amended and in effect on 10 April 2006;

ICSID Convention means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, done at
Washington, on 18 March 1965; |

investment ' 14 means every kind of asset, owned or controlled, by an
investor of a Party, in the territory of the other Party and invested in
accordance with the laws, regulations and national policies of the other Party,
including:

(i) movable and immovable property and any other property rights such
as mortgages, liens or pledges '5;

(ii), bonds, debentures, loans and other forms of debt of an enterprise,
including rights derived therefrom'.17;

'2 For greater certainty, a branch of a legal entity of a non-Party shall not be considered as an enterprise
of a Party.

3 When an asset lacks the characteristics of an investment, that asset is not an investment regardless of
the form it may take. The characteristics of an investment include the commitment of capital, the
expectation of gain or profit, the assumption of risk, and certain duration.

14 The term investment also includes amounts yielded by investments, in particular, profits, interest,
capital gains, dividend, royalties and fees. Any alteration of the form in which assets are invested or
reinvested shall not affect their classification as investment.

15 For greater certainty, market share, access to market, expected gains, and opportunities for profit-
making are not, by themselves, investments.

16 Some forms of debt, such as bonds, debentures, and long-term notes, are more likely to have the
characteristics of an investment, while other forms of debt such as claims to payment that are immediately
due and result from the sale of goods or services, are less likely to have such characteristics.

1? For the purpose of this Agreement, loans and other debt instruments and claims to money or claims
to any performance under a written contract having financial value refer to assets which relate to a
business activity associated with an investment and do not refer to assets which are of a personal nature,

unrelated to any business activity associated with an investment. A.
27 /48

ya

18

Lin

shares, stocks or other forms of equity participations in an enterprise,
including rights derived therefrom;

claims to money' or claims to any performance under a written
contract having financial value;

intellectual property rights, means copyright and related rights, patent
rights, trademark rights, rights in geographical indications, rights in
industrial designs, rights in layout designs (topographies) of
integrated circuits, rights in relation to protection of undisclosed
information, plant breeders rights, which are conferred pursuant to
laws and regulations of each Party and goodwill;

(vi) concessions conferred by law or under contract, including
concessions to search for, cultivate, extract, or exploit natural
resources;

(vii) turnkey, construction, management, production, concession,
revenue-sharing, and other similar contracts;

(vill) an enterprise.
An enterprise is considered:

owned by an investor if more than 50 percent of the equity interests in it is
beneficially owned by the investor; and

controlled by an investor if the investor has the power to name a majority
of its directors or otherwise to legally direct its actions.

investor of a Party means a natural person of a Party or an enterprise of a
Party, that attempts to make, is making, or has made an investment in the
territory of the other Party which is located in the territory of the Party;

(i) | the term natural person of a Party means:

in respect of Malaysia, person who under the laws, regulation and
national policies of Malaysia is a citizen of Malaysia or has the right of
permanent residence in Malaysia; and

_ In respect of the Republic of Turkiye, any natural person possessing
the nationality of Turkiye in accordance with its laws.

the term enterprise of a Party means any entity duly constituted or
organised under the law of a Party and engaged in substantive
business operations in that Party. Such entity may either be for profit or
- otherwise, privately-owned or controlled, or governmentally-owned or
controlled, and includes any corporation, trust, partnership, joint

For greater certainty, investment does not mean claims to money that arise solely from:
(a) commercial contracts for sale of goods or services; or
(b) the extension of credit in connection with such commercial contracts.

venture, sole proprietorship, association, organisation, company or
branch!9,

investor of a non-Party means, with respect to a Party, an investor that
attempts to make, is making, or has made an investment in the territory of
that Party, that is not an investor of either Party;

measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law,
regulation, rule, procedure, practice, decision, administrative actions or any
other form, adopted or maintained by:

(1) central, regional, or local governments and authorities; and

(ii) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by
* central, regional, or local governments or authorities.

New York Convention means the Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, adopted at the United Nations in
New York on 10 June 1958;

respondent means the Party that is a party to an investment dispute;

return means an amount yielded by or derived from an investment, including
profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, payments in
connection with intellectual property rights, and all other lawful income. For
the purposes of the definition of investment, returns that are invested shall
be treated as investments and any alteration of the form in which assets are
invested or reinvested shall not affect their character as investments.

TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights, contained in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement.
For greater certainty, TRIPS Agreement includes any waiver in force
between the Parties of any provisions of the TRIPS Agreement granted by
WTO Members in accordance with the WTO Agreement.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules means the arbitration rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law, as adopted by the United
Nations General Assembly on 15 December 1976, as revised in 2010.

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World
Trade Organisation, done on 15 April 1994.

Article 18.3
Relation to Other Chapters

hi This Chapter does not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party to the
extent that they are covered by Chapters 15 (Trade in Services).

18 For greater certainty, a branch of a legal entity of a non-Party shall not be considered as an enterprise
of a Party.

HHA

2 Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this Article, Article 18.4 (Minimum Standard of
Treatment), Article 18.7 (Compensation for Losses), Article 18.12 (Expropriation), Article
18.13 (Transfers), Article 18.15 (Subrogation) and Section 18-B (Investor  State Dispute
Settlement) of this Chapter shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to any measure affecting the
supply of service by a service supplier of a Party through commercial presence in the
territory of the other Party pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15 (Trade in Services),
but only to the extent that they relate to a covered investment and an obligation under
this Chapter.

Article 18.4
Minimum Standard of Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment in accordance with
customary international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens@, including fair and
equitable treatment and full protection and security.

2 For greater certainty, paragraph 1 prescribes the customary international law
minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the minimum standard of treatment to be
afforded to covered investments. The concepts of fair and equitable treatment and full
protection and security do not require treatment in addition to or beyond that which is
required by that standard, and do not create additional substantive rights. The obligation
to provide:

(a) fair and equitable treatment requires each party not to deny justice in
criminal, civil or administrative adjudicatory proceedings in accordance with
the principle of due process of law; and

(b) full protection and security requires each Party to provide the level of police
protection required under customary international law.

3: A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of this
Agreement, or of a separate international agreement, does not establish that there has
been a breach of this Article.

4. For greater certainty, the mere fact that a Party takes or fails to take an action that
may be inconsistent with an investor's expectations does not constitute a breach of this
Article, even if there is loss or damage to the covered investment as a result.

Article 18.5
National Treatment

he Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with respect to
the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or
other disposition of investments in its territory.

20 Customary international law results from a general and consistent practice of States that they follow
from a sense of legal obligation. With regard to this Article, the customary international law minimum
standard of treatment of aliens refers to all customary international law principles that protect the economic
rights and interests of aliens.

A 30 /48
Lik

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favourable than
that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments in its territory of its own investors
with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct,
operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.

Article 18.6
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

Zi Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party and to their investments
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors of a
non-Party and to their investments, with respect to establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation, liquidation, sale, transfer or other disposition of
investments.

z The treatment, as set forth in paragraph 1, shall not include:

any preferential treatment accorded to investors and their investments under
any existing bilateral, regional or international agreements, or any forms of
economic or regional cooperation with any non-Party; and

any existing or future preferential treatment accorded to investors and their
investments in any agreement or arrangement between or among ASEAN
Member States.

a. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, if a Party accords more favourable treatment
to investors of non-Party and their investments by virtue of any future agreements or
arrangements to which that Party is a party, it shall not be obliged to accord such
treatment to investors of the other Party and their investments. However, upon request
from the other Party, it shall accord adequate opportunity to negotiate the benefits
granted therein.

4. For greater certainty, the treatment referred to in this Article does not encompass
international dispute resolution procedures or mechanisms.

Article 18.7
Compensation for Losses

a, Investors. of one Party whose investments in the territory of the other Party
suffer losses owing to war or other armed conflict, revolution, a state of national
emergency, insurrection, riot, or any other similar event in the territory of the latter
Party shall be accorded by the latter Party treatment, as regards restitution,
indemnification, compensation or other settlement, no less favourable than that which
the latter Party accords to investors of any non-Party.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, each Party shall accord to investors of another
Party and to covered investments non-discriminatory treatment with respect to
measures it adopts or maintains relating to losses suffered by investments in its
territory owing to the situations referred in paragraph 1.

a Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if an investor of a Party, in a situation referred to
in paragraph 1, suffers a loss in the territory of another Party resulting from:

requisitioning of its covered investment or part thereof by the latter's
forces or authorities; or

destruction of its covered investment or part thereof by the latters forces
or authorities, which was not required by the necessity of the situation,

the latter Party shall provide the investor restitution, compensation or both, as
appropriate, for that loss.

Article 18.8
Performance Requirements

The Parties reaffirm their commitments to the Agreement on Trade-Related
Investment Measures in Annex 1A to the VWWTO Agreement.

Article 18.9
Senior Management and Boards of Directors

1. Neither Party may require that an enterprise of that Party that is a covered
investment appoint to senior management positions natural persons of any particular
nationality.

2. A Party may require that a majority of the board of directors, or any committee
thereof, of an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment, be of a particular
nationality, or resident in the territory of the Party, provided that the requirement does not
materially impair the ability of the investor of the other Party to exercise control over its
investment.

Article 18.10
Non-Conforming Measures

1. Articles 18.5 (National Treatment), 18.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), 18.8
(Performance Requirements) and 18.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors) do
not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at the
central, regional or local levels of government as set out in its Schedule to
List | under Annex 18-A/18-B (Schedules of Reservations and Non-
Conforming Measures for Investment).

the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred
to in subparagraph (a); or

an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph
(a) to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the
measure, as it existed at the date of the entry into force of this Agreement,
with Articles 18.5 (National Treatment), 18.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment), 18.8 (Performance Requirements) and 18.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors).

2. Articles 18.5 (National Treatment), 18.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), 18.8
(Performance Requirements) and 18.9 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors) do
not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors,
subsectors, or activities at the central, regional or local levels of government, as set out
in its Schedule to List Il under Annex 18-A/18-B (Schedules of Reservations and Non-
Conforming Measures for Investment).

a. Neither Party may, under any measure adopted after the date of entry into force
of this Agreement and covered by its Schedule to List Il under Annex 18-A/18-B
(Schedules of Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures for Investment), require an
investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an
investment existing at the time the measure becomes effective.

4. Article 18.5 (National Treatment) and Article 18.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment) shall not apply to any measure that falls within Article 5 of the TRIPS
Agreement, and any measure that is covered by an exception to, or derogation from, the
obligations under Article 3 or Article 4 of the TRIPS Agreement.

Article 18.11
Special Formalities and Treatment of Information

ie Nothing in Article 18.5 (National Treatment) shall be construed to prevent a Party
from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities in connection
with covered investments, such as residency requirements for registration or a
requirement that covered investments be legally constituted under its laws or regulations,
provided that such formalities do not materially impair the protections afforded by the
Party to investors of the other Party and covered investments pursuant to this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding Article 18.5 (National Treatment) and Article 18.6 (Most-
Favoured-Nation Treatment), a Party may require an investor of the other Party or its
covered investment to provide information concerning that investment solely for
informational or statistical purposes. The Party shall protect such business information
that is confidential from any disclosure that would prejudice the competitive position of
the investor or the covered investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to
prevent a Party from otherwise obtaining or disclosing information in connection with the
equitable and good faith application of its law.

Article 18.12
Expropriation!

1. A Party shall not expropriate or nationalise an investment of an investor of the other
Party, either directly or indirectly, except under the following conditions:

(a) the measures are taken for a lawful or public purpose**: 23; and
the measures are non-discriminatory; and

the measures are accompanied by the payment of prompt, adequate and
effective compensation; and

under due process of law.

2. Such compensation shall be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated
investments:

(a) at the time when or immediately before the expropriation was publicly
announced; or

(b) when the expropriation occurred,
whichever is the earlier.

3. The fair market value shall not reflect any change in market value occurring
because the expropriation had become publicly known earlier.

4. The compensation shall be paid without unreasonable delay and it shall be:
(a) effectively realisable;
(b) freely transferable; and

(c) freely convertible into any freely usable currency.

5. In the event of delay, payment of compensation shall include interest, which shall
be determined by taking into account any applicable rates prescribed by the laws,
regulations and policies of the expropriating Party.

21 Article 18.12 shall be interpreted in accordance with Annex 18-1 (Expropriation).

22 For greater certainty, for the purposes of this Article, the term public purpose refers to a concept in
customary international law. Domestic law may express this or a similar concept by using different terms,
such as public necessity, public interest or public use.

23. For the avoidance of doubt, if Malaysia is the expropriating Party, any measure of direct expropriation
relating to land shall be for the purposes as set out in the Land Acquisitions Act 1960, Land Acquisition
Ordinance 1950 of the State of Sabah and the Land Code 1958 of the State of Sarawak, as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement for it.

6. For the avoidance of doubt, any measure of expropriation relating to land shall be
defined as in the Parties respective existing domestic laws, regulations and policies, and
any amendments thereto, and shall be for the purposes of and upon payment of
compensation in accordance with the aforesaid laws, regulations and policies.

i. This Article shall not apply to the issuance of compulsory licences granted in
relation to intellectual property rights, or to the creation, limitation or revocation of
intellectual property rights, to the extent such issuance, revocation, limitation or creation
is consistent with the TRIPS Agreement.*4

Article 18.13
Transfers

1. Each Party shall allow all transfers relating to a covered investment to be made
freely and without unreasonable delay into and out of its territory in any freely usable
currency. Such transfers include:

contributions to capital, including the initial contribution;

profits, dividends, royalties, technical fees, interest and other current income,
accruing from any investment of investors of the other Party;

proceeds from the total or partial sale or liquidation of any covered
investment made by investors of the other Party;

payments made under a contract including loan payments in connection with
covered investments;

earnings and other remuneration of personnel employed and allowed to work
in connection with that investment in its territory;

payments made pursuant to Article 18.7 (Compensation for Losses) and
Article 18.12 (Expropriation); and

(g) payments arising out of the settlement of a dispute by any means.

4 The exchange rates applicable to such transfer in paragraph 1 of this Article shall
be the rate of exchange prevailing at the time of transfer.

3 Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, a Party may delay or prevent
a transfer referred to paragraph 1 through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good
faith application of its laws relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency, or the protection of the rights of creditors;

(bo) issuing, trading, or dealing in securities, futures, options, or derivatives;

24 For greater certainty, the Parties recognise that, for the purposes of this Article, the term revocation of
the intellectual property rights includes the cancellation or nullification of those rights, and the term
limitation of intellectual property rights includes exceptions to those rights.

financial reporting or record keeping of transfers to assist law enforcement
or financial regulatory authorities;

criminal or penal offences;

ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or administrative
proceedings;

obligations of investors arising from social security, public retirement or
compulsory savings schemes;

taxation; or

requirements to register and satisfy other transfer formalities imposed by the
Central Bank and other relevant authorities of that Party.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of each Party as a
member of the International Monetary Fund under the Articles of Agreement of the
International Monetary Fund, including the use of exchange actions which are in
conformity with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund.

Article 18.14
Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of Payments

A Where a Party is in serious balance of payments and external financial difficulties
or under threat thereof, or where, in exceptional circumstances, payments or transfers
relating to capital movements cause or threaten to cause serious difficulties for
macroeconomic management, it may adopt or maintain restrictions on payments or
transfers related to covered investments as defined in Article 18.2 (Definitions).

2. Restrictions adopted or maintained under paragraph 1 shall:
be consistent with the IMF Articles of Agreement as may be amended;

avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic, and financial
interests of the other Party;

not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances described in
paragraph 1;

be temporary and be phased out progressively as the situation specified in
paragraph 1 improves; and

be applied on a non-discriminatory basis such that no Party is treated less
favourably than any other Party or a non-Party.

dh 36 /48

With respect to investment:

(a) it is recognised that particular pressures on the balance of payments of a
Party in the process of economic development or economic transition may
necessitate the use of restrictions to ensure, inter alia, the maintenance of a
level of financial reserves adequate for the implementation of its programme
of economic development or economic transition; and

in determining the incidence of such restrictions, a Party may give priority to
economic sectors which are more essential to its economic or development
programmes. However, such restrictions shall not be adopted or maintained
for the purposes of protecting a particular sector.

4. Any restriction adopted or maintained by a Party under paragraph 1, or any
change thereto, shall be notified promptly to the other Parties.

5. A Party adopting or maintaining any restriction under paragraph 1 shall, in the
case of investments, respond to any other Party that requests consultations in relation to
the restrictions adopted by it, if such consultations are not otherwise taking place outside
this Agreement.

Article 18.15
Subrogation

1. If a Party, or any agency, institution, statutory body or corporation designated by
the Party, makes a payment to any of its investors under a guarantee, a contract of
insurance or other form of indemnity it has granted in respect of a covered investment,
against non-commercial risks, the other Party shall recognise the subrogation or transfer
of any right or title in respect of such covered investment.

2. The Party or its designated agency is entitled by virtue of subrogation to exercise
the rights and enforce the claims of that investor. The subrogated or transferred right or
claim shall not be greater than the original right or claim of the investor.

3. Where a Party, or any agency, institution, statutory body or corporation designated
by the Party, has made a payment to an investor of that Party and has taken over rights
and claims of the investor, that investor shall not, unless authorised to act on behalf of
the Party or the designated agency of the Party making the payment, pursue those rights
and claims against the other Party.

4. In the exercise of subrogated rights or claims, a Party or the agency of the Party
exercising such rights or claims shall disclose the coverage of the claims arrangement
with its investors to the other Party.

Article 18.16
Promotion and Facilitation of Investment

The Parties shall seek to strengthen and build on existing cooperative arrangements in
the promotion and facilitation of investment where this is of mutual benefit, including
through:

Oe 37 /48
A

supporting joint investment promotion activities;

facilitating the provision and exchange of investment information including
laws, regulations and policies to increase awareness of investment
opportunities; and

fostering technical cooperation in mutually agreed sectors.

SECTION 18-B
INVESTOR-STATE DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Article 18.17
Scope

i. This Section shall apply to an investment dispute between a disputing Party and
a disputing investor that has incurred loss or damage by reason of an alleged breach of
any rights conferred by the Section 18-A of this Chapter with respect to the covered
investment of that investor.

2, A natural person possessing the nationality or citizenship of a Party shall not
pursue a claim against that Party under this Section.

a. This Section shall not apply to claims arising out of events which occurred, or
claims which have been raised prior to the entry into force of this Agreement.

4. Nothing in this Section shall be construed so as to prevent a disputing investor
from seeking administrative or judicial settlement available within the territory of a
disputing Party.

Article 18.18
Consultations

a; In the event of an investment dispute, the disputing investor shall initially seek to
resolve the dispute through consultations.

2. The disputing investor shall deliver to the disputing Party a written request for
consultations setting out a brief description of facts regarding the alleged breach.

a, With the objective of resolving an investment dispute through consultations, a
disputing investor shall make all reasonable efforts to provide the disputing Party the
information regarding the legal and factual basis of the investment dispute.

Article 18.19
Conciliation

1, The disputing parties may at any time agree to conciliation, which may begin at
any time and be terminated at the request of the disputing investor at any time.

25 For greater certainty, the initiation of consultations shall not be construed as recognition of the jurisdiction
of the tribunal that may be established thereafter.

LHA

2. If the disputing parties agree, procedures for conciliation may continue while
procedures provided for in Article 18.20 (Institution of Arbitral Proceedings) are in
progress.

3, Proceedings involving conciliation and positions taken by the disputing parties
during these proceedings shall be without prejudice to the rights of either disputing parties
in any further proceedings under this Section.

Article 18.20
Institution of Arbitral Proceedings

1. Where the dispute cannot be resolved as provided for under paragraph 1 of Article
18.18 (Consultations) within 6 months from the date of a written request for consultations
and negotiations, the claimant may submit to arbitration:

(a) acclaim, on its own behalf, that the respondent has breached an obligation
under Section 18-A and the claimant has incurred loss or damage by reason
of, or arising out of, that breach; and

(b) a claim, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is an enterprise that
the claimant owns or controls, that the respondent has breached an
obligation under Section 18-A and the enterprise has incurred loss or
damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach.

A claimant may submit the claim to arbitration:

(a) under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules, provided that
both Parties are parties to the ICSID Convention;

under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules;
Istanbul Arbitration Centre (ISTAC);
Asian International Arbitration Centre (AIAC); or

to any other arbitral institutions or under any other arbitration rules, if the
disputing parties so agree.

Article 18.21
Conditions and Limitations on Submission of a Claim

1. An investor shall not be entitled to make a claim, if more than three years have
elapsed from the date on which the investor first acquired, or should have first acquired
knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor has incurred loss or
damage.

2. Each Party hereby consents to the submission of a dispute to arbitration under
subparagraphs 2(a), 2(b), 2(c), 2(d) and 2(e) of Article 18.20 (Institution of Arbitral
Proceedings) in accordance with the provisions of this Section, conditional upon the
submission of the disputing investor's written waiver of its right to initiate or continue any
proceedings before the courts of either Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any

Lan 39 /48

proceedings with respect to any measure alleged to constitute a breach of any rights
conferred by the Section 18-A with respect to the investment of the disputing investor.

a, The disputing investor who intends to submit the dispute pursuant to Article 18.20
(Institution of Arbitral Proceedings) shall give to the disputing Party written notice of intent
to do so at least three months before the claim is submitted. The notice of intent shall
specify:

(a) the name and address of the disputing investor and its legal representative;

(b) the specific measures of the disputing Party at issue and a brief summary of
the factual and legal basis of the dispute sufficient to present the problem
clearly, including the provisions of this Agreement alleged to have been
breached: and

(c) the relief sought, and where appropriate, the approximate amount of damages
claimed.

4. Neither Party shall, in respect of a dispute which one of its investors have submitted
to arbitration in accordance with Article 18.20 (Institution of Arbitral Proceedings), give
diplomatic protection, or bring an international claim before another forum. Diplomatic
protection, for the purposes of this paragraph, shall not include informal diplomatic
exchanges for the sole purpose of facilitating a settlement of the dispute.

" Notwithstanding paragraph 2, the disputing investor may initiate or continue an
action that seeks interim measures of protection and does not involve the payment of
monetary damages before a judicial or administrative tribunal of the disputing Party in
accordance with its laws and regulations, provided that the action is brought for the sole
purpose of preserving the disputing investors rights and interest during the pendency of
the arbitration.

6. In deciding whether an investment dispute is within the jurisdiction of ICSID and
competence of the tribunal established under subparagraphs 2(a) of Article 18.20
(Institution of Arbitral Proceedings), that tribunal shall comply with the notification submitted
by the Republic of Turkiye on March 3, 1989 to ICSID in accordance with Article 25 (4) of
ICSID Convention, concerning classes of disputes considered suitable or unsuitable for
submission to the jurisdiction of ICSID, as an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 18.22
Constitution of Arbitral Tribunal

Ns Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, an arbitral tribunal established under
Article 18.20 (Institution of Arbitral Proceedings) shall comprise three arbitrators, one
arbitrator appointed by each of the disputing parties and the third, who shall be the
presiding arbitrator, appointed by the two arbitrators appointed by the disputing parties.

2, If the disputing investor or the disputing Party fails to appoint an arbitrator within
90 days from the date on which the investment dispute was submitted to arbitration, the
Director of Asian International Arbitration Centre in the case of arbitration referred to in
Article 18.20(2)(d) (Institution of Arbitral Proceedings), or the Director of Istanbul
Arbitration Centre in the case of arbitration referred to in Article 18.20(2)(c) (Institution of

VTS Ay 40 /48

Arbitral Proceedings), or the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID in the case
of arbitration referred to in Article 18.20(2)(a) (Institution of Arbitral Proceedings), or the
Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration in the case of arbitration referred
to in Article 18.20(2)(b) and 2(e) (Institution of Arbitral Proceedings), on the request of
either of the disputing parties, shall appoint, in his or her discretion, the arbitrator or
arbitrators not yet appointed from the AIAC, ISTAC, ICSID or PCA Panel of Arbitrators
respectively, subject to the requirements of paragraph 3 of this Article.

3. Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the third arbitrator shall not be of the
same nationality as the disputing investor, nor be a national of the disputing Party, nor
have his or her usual place of residence in the territory of either Party, nor be employed
by either of the disputing parties, nor have dealt with that investment dispute in any
capacity.

4. Arbitrators shall have expertise or experience in public international law,
international trade or international investment law, or the resolution of disputes arising
under international trade or international investment agreements. They shall be
independent of, and not be affiliated with or take instructions from either Party or disputing
parties.

os Where the dispute involves measures relating to financial institutions, or to
investors or investments of such investors in financial institutions, or where the disputing
investor or disputing Party invokes Article 18.13 (Transfers) or Article 18.31 (General
Exceptions), the arbitrators shall, in addition to the criteria set out in paragraph 4, have
expertise or experience in financial services law or practice, which may include the

regulation of financial institutions.

6. The disputing parties may establish rules relating to expenses incurred by the
arbitral tribunal, including remuneration of the arbitrators.

7. Where any arbitrator appointed as provided for in this Article resigns or becomes
unable to act, a successor shall be appointed in the same manner as prescribed for the
appointment of the original arbitrator and the successor shall have all the powers and
duties of the original arbitrator.

8. Each disputing party shall bear the cost of its own arbitrator and its representation
in the arbitral proceedings. The cost of the presiding arbitrator in discharging his arbitral
function and the remaining costs of the tribunal shall be borne equally by the disputing
parties. The arbitral tribunal may, however, apportion each of such costs between the
disputing parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into account
the circumstances of the case.

Article 18.23
Conduct of the Arbitration

1. Where issues relating to jurisdiction, admissibility or competence are raised as

preliminary objections, the arbitral tribunal established under Article 18.22 (Constitution
of Arbitral Tribunal) shall decide the matter before proceeding to the merits.

2. A disputing Party may, no later than 30 days after the constitution of the arbitral
tribunal, file an objection that a claim is manifestly without merit or inadmissible. A
disputing Party may also file an objection that a claim is otherwise outside the jurisdiction
or competence of the tribunal. The disputing Party shall specify as precisely as possible
the basis for the objection.

3, The arbitral tribunal shall address any such objection as a preliminary question
apart from the merits of the claim. The disputing parties shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present their views and observations to the arbitral tribunal. If the arbitral
tribunal decides that the claim is manifestly without merit or inadmissible, or is otherwise
not within the jurisdiction or competence of the arbitral tribunal, it shall render an award
to that effect.

4. The arbitral tribunal may, if warranted, award the prevailing party reasonable costs
and fees incurred in submitting or opposing the objection. In determining whether such
an award is warranted, the arbitral tribunal shall consider whether either the claim or the
objection was manifestly without merit, and shall provide the disputing parties a
reasonable opportunity to comment.

5. The arbitral tribunal shall reach its decisions by a majority of votes and its decisions
shall be binding and final.

Article 18.24
Place of Arbitration

Unless the disputing parties otherwise agree, the tribunal shall determine the place of
arbitration in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules, provided that the place
shall be in the territory of a State that is a party to the New York Convention.

Article 18.25
Award

1. The disputing parties may agree on a resolution of the dispute at any time before
the arbitral tribunal issues its final award.

2. The award shall include:
(a) a judgment as to whether or not there has been a breach by the disputing

Party of any rights conferred by this Chapter in respect of the disputing
investor and its investments; and

a remedy if there has been such breach. The remedy shall be limited to one
or both of the following:

(i) payment of monetary damages and applicable interest; and

(ii) restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that the
disputing Party may pay monetary damages and any simple interest in

lieu of restitution.
on 42 /48

3. A tribunal may also award costs and attorneys fees in accordance with this
Chapter and the applicable arbitration rules.

4. An arbitral tribunal shall not award punitive damages.

a: The award rendered in accordance with paragraph 2 shall be final and binding
upon the disputing parties. An award shall have no binding force except between the
disputing parties and in respect of the particular case. The disputing Party shall carry out
without delay the provisions of any such award and provide in the territory of the disputing
Party for the enforcement of such award in accordance with its relevant laws and
regulations.

6. Subject to paragraph 7 and the applicable review procedure for an interim award, a
disputing party shall abide by and comply with an award without delay.76

: A disputing party shall not seek enforcement of a final award until:
(a) in the case of a final award under the ICSID Convention:

(i) 120 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no
disputing party has requested revision or annulment of the award; or

(ii) revision or annulment proceeding have been completed;

in the case of final award under the rules selected pursuant to Article 18.20
subparagraphs 2(b), 2(c), 2(d) and 2(e):

(i) 90 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no
disputing party has commenced a proceeding to revise, set aside, or annul
the award; or

(ii) a court has dismissed or allowed an application to revise, set aside, or
annul the award and there is no further appeal.

8. Each Party shall provide for the enforcement of an award in its territory.

4. A disputing party may seek enforcement of an arbitration award under the New
York Convention.

10. A claim that is submitted for arbitration under this Section shall be considered to

arise out of commercial relationship or transaction for purposes of Article 1 of the New
York Convention.

26 The Parties understand that there may be domestic legal and administrative processes that need to be
observed before an award can be complied with.

MHA

Article 18.26
Governing Law

The arbitral tribunal shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement
and the applicable rules of international law. For greater certainty, this provision is without
prejudice to any consideration of the domestic law of the disputing Party when it is
relevant to the claim as a matter of fact.

Article 18.27
Joint Interpretation

a A joint interpretation by the Parties on a provision of this Chapter shall bind the
arbitral tribunal established under Article 18.22 (Constitution of Arbitral Tribunal), and an
award under Article 18.25 (Awards) must be consistent with that interpretation.

2. When the disputing Party asserts a defence that the measure alleged to be a
breach is outside of the scope of this Chapter, the arbitral tribunal shall, at the request of
the disputing Party, request the joint interpretation of the Parties on the issue. Within 60
days of the delivery of the request, the Parties shall submit in writing their joint
interpretation to the arbitral tribunal. If the Parties fail to submit their joint interpretation
within 60 days of the arbitral tribunals request, the arbitral tribunal shall decide the issue.

Article 18.28
Consolidation

a, Where two or more claims have been submitted separately to arbitration under
this Section, and the claims have a question of law or fact in common and arise out of
the same events or circumstances, any disputing party may seek a consolidation order,
in accordance with the agreement of the other disputing party sought to be covered by
the order or the terms of this Article.

2. A disputing party that seeks a consolidation order under this Article shall deliver,
in writing, a request to the Secretary-General of ICSID and to the other disputing party
sought to be covered by the order, specifying the name and address of the other disputing
party sought to be covered by the order; the nature of the order sought and the grounds
on which the order is sought.

A. Unless the Secretary-General of ICSID finds within 30 days after receiving a
request in conformity with paragraph 2 that the request is manifestly unfounded, a tribunal
shall be established under this Article.

4. Unless the other disputing party sought to be covered by the consolidation order
otherwise agree, the tribunal established under this Article shall comprise three
arbitrators:

(a) one arbitrator appointed by agreement of the disputing investors;
(b) one arbitrator appointed by the respondent; and

(c) the chairman of the arbitral tribunal appointed by the Secretary-General of
ICSID provided that the chairman shall not be a national of either Party.

5. If, within the 60 days after the Secretary-General receives a request made under
paragraph 2, the respondent fails or the disputing investors fail to appoint an arbitrator in
accordance with paragraph 4, the Secretary-General, on request of any disputing party
sought to be covered by the order, shall appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet
appointed.

6. Where a tribunal established under this Article is satisfied that two or more claims
that have been submitted to arbitration in accordance to Article 18.20 (institution of
Arbitral Proceedings), have a question of law or fact in common, and arise out of the
same events or circumstances, the tribunal may, in the interest of fair and efficient
resolution of the claims, and after hearing the disputing parties, by order:

(a) assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine together, all or part of the
claims;

(b) assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine one or more claims, whose
determination it considers would assist in the resolution of the other claims;
or

(c) instruct a tribunal previously established under Article 18.22 (Constitution of
Arbitral Tribunal) to assume jurisdiction over and to hear and determine
together, all or part of the claims, provided that:

(i) that tribunal, at the request of any disputing investor not previously a
disputing party before that tribunal, shall be reconstituted with its
original members, except that the arbitrator for the disputing investors

shall be appointed pursuant to paragraphs 4(a) and 5; and

(ii) tribunal shall decide whether any previous hearing must be repeated.

7. Where a tribunal has been established under this Article, a disputing investor that
has submitted a claim to arbitration pursuant to Article 18.20 (Institution of Arbitral
Proceedings) and that has not been named in a request made under paragraph 2, may
make a written request to the tribunal that it be included in any order issued under
paragraph 6, specifying:

(a) the name and address of the disputing investor;

(b) the nature of the order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the order is sought.
The claimant shall provide the Secretary-General with a copy of his request.

8. A tribunal established pursuant to this Article shall conduct the proceedings in
accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, except as modified by this Section.

9) A tribunal established under Article 18.22 (Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal)

shall not have jurisdiction to decide a claim or a part of a claim over which a tribunal
established or instructed under this Article has assumed jurisdiction.

THA

10. On application of a disputing party, a tribunal established pursuant to this Article
may, pending its decision under paragraph 6, order that the proceedings of a tribunal
established under Article 18.22 (Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal) be stayed, unless
the latter tribunal has already adjourned its proceedings.

SECTION 18-C
FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 18.29
Denial of Benefits

Ale A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of the other Party that
is an enterprise of the latter Party and to investments of that investor if the enterprise:

(a) is owned or controlled by a person of a non-Party or of the denying Party;
and.

(b) has no substantial business activities in the territory of the latter Party.

2. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of the other Party that
is an enterprise of the latter Party and to investments of that investor if persons of a non-
Party own or control the enterprise and the denying Party adopts or maintains measures
with respect to the non-Party or a person of the non-Party that prohibit transactions with
the enterprise or that would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter
were accorded to the enterprise or to its investments.

Article 18.30
Publication of International Agreements

1. Each Party shall endeavour that international agreements pertaining to or affecting
investors or investment activities to which a Party is a signatory are promptly published
or otherwise made available in such a manner as to enable interested persons or parties
to become acquainted with them.

2. To the extent possible, each Party shall make the international agreements of the
kind referred to in paragraph 1 available on the Internet. Each Party shall endeavour to
respond to specific questions from and provide information to the other Party with respect
to the international agreements referred to in paragraph 1.

Article 18.31
General Exceptions?

al, Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which
would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against the other
Party or its investors where like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on
investments of investors of the other Party in the territory of a Party, nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by a Party of non-
discriminatory legal measures:

27 For greater certainty, the application of the general exception to these provisions shall not be interpreted
$0 as to diminish the ability of governments to take measures where investors are not in like circumstances

due to the existence of legitimate regulatory objectives. '
sth ON _

necessary to protect or maintain public order?;

necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health?9;

necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement including those relating to:

(i) | the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with the
effects of a default on a contract;

(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing
and dissemination of personal data and the protection of confidentiality
of individual records and accounts;

(iil) safety;
(d) relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources; or

(e) necessary to the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or
archaeological value.

2 Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, a Party shall not be
prevented from taking measures for prudential reasons, including for the protection of
investors, depositors, policy holders or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed by a
financial service supplier, or to ensure the integrity and stability of the financial system.
Where such measures do not conform with the provisions of this Chapter, they shall not
be used as a means of avoiding the commitments or obligations under this Chapter.

a Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party to disclose
information relating to the affairs and accounts of individual customers or any confidential
or proprietary information in the possession of public entities.

Article 18.32
Savings Clause

1. For ten (10) years from the date of termination of this Agreement, the following
provisions (including the relevant Annexes and Appendices) shall continue to apply to
covered investments in existence at the date of termination, and without prejudice to the
application thereafter of the rules of international law:

(a) the provisions of this Chapter; and

(b) such other provisions in the Agreement as may be necessary for or
consequential to the application or interpretation of this Chapter.

2. For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph 1 shall not apply to the establishment,
acquisition or expansion of investments after the date of termination.

28 The public order exception may be invoked only where a genuine and sufficiently serious threat is posed
to one of the fundamental interests of society.

22 The Parties understand that the measures referred in subparagraph 1(b) include environmental
measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health.

HA

Article 18.33
Term of Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement

4. This Chapter substitutes and replaces the Agreement between the Government
of the Republic of Turkiye and the Government of Malaysia for the Reciprocal Promotion
and Protection of Investments (IPPA), which will be terminated on the date of entry into
force of this Agreement. The disputes submitted to arbitration after the date of the entry
into force of this Agreement shall be settled in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.

2, Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the termination of the IPPA shall not affect the
benefits and advantages received by the investors and investments under the IPPA for
a period of five (5) years.



