Inspired by their longstanding friendship and cooperation and growing economic, trade and
investment relationship;

Recognising that the strengthening of their economic partnership will bring economic and
social benefits, create new opportunities for employment and improve the living standards of

their people;

Creating an expanded and secure market for the goods and services produced in their
territories;

Resolved to promote bilateral trade through the establishment of clear and mutually
advantageous trade rules and the avoidance of trade barriers;

Promoting a predictable, transparent, and consistent business environment that will assist
juridical persons to plan effectively and use resources efficiently;

Building on their respective rights and obligations under the World Trade Organisation
(WTO), other multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements to which they are both parties;

Recalling the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) goals and aware of the growing
importance of trade and investment for the economies of the Asia-Pacific region; and

Desiring to strengthen the cooperative framework for the conduct of economic relations to
ensure it is dynamic and encourages broader and deeper economic cooperation;

HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:

Article 1.1:

Chapter 1
Initial Provisions

Objectives

The objectives of this Agreement are to:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)

(f)
(g)

Article 1.2:

liberalise and facilitate trade in goods and services between the Parties;

facilitate the mutual recognition of the results of conformity assessment
procedures for products or processes;

liberalise, encourage and promote investment and ensure protection for
investments and investment activities in the Parties;

facilitate the movement of natural persons;

ensure and enhance adequate, effective and non-discriminatory protection of
trade between the Parties;

enhance cooperation for mutual benefit of the Parties; and

promote transparency in the implementation of laws and _ regulations
respecting matters covered by this Agreement.

Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties, consistent with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and Article V of the
GATS, hereby establish a free trade area.

Article 1.3:

Relation to Other Agreements

The Parties reaffirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other
under the WTO Agreement and other agreements to which both Parties are party.

Chapter 2
General Definitions
Article 2.1: Definitions of General Application
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:
Agreement means the Free Trade Agreement between Chile and Thailand;
APEC means Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation;

Commission means the Free Trade Commission established under Article 13.1 (Free Trade
Commission);

customs authority means the authority that, according to the legislation of each Party, is
responsible for the administration and enforcement of its customs laws and regulations:

(a) in the case of Chile, the Chile Customs Service; and
(b) in the case of Thailand, the Customs Department;

customs duties includes any import duty and a charge of any kind imposed in connection
with the importation of a good, but does not include any:

(a) charges equivalent to internal taxes, including excise duties, sales tax, and
goods and services taxes imposed in accordance with a Party’s commitments

under paragraph 2 of Article III of GATT 1994;

(b) anti-dumping or countervailing duty or safeguards duty applied in accordance
with Chapter 8 (Trade Remedies); or

(c) fees or other charges that are limited in amount to the approximate cost of
services rendered, and do not represent a direct or indirect protection for

domestic goods or a taxation of imports for fiscal purposes;

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of
GATT 1994, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

days means calendar days, including weekends and public holidays;
existing means in effect on the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

GATS means the General Agreement on Trade in Services, contained in Annex 1B to the
WTO Agreement;

GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, contained in Annex
1A to the WTO Agreement;

goods of a Party means domestic products as these are understood in GATT 1994 or such
goods as the Parties may agree, and includes originating goods of that Party. A good of a
Party may include materials of other countries;

Harmonised System (HS) means the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding
System governed by The International Convention on the Harmonised Commodity
Description and Coding System, including its General Rules of Interpretation, Section
Notes, and Chapter Notes, and their amendments, as adopted and implemented by the Parties
in their respective tariff laws;

heading means the first four digits in the tariff classification number under the Harmonised
System (HS);

juridical person of a state means a juridical person that is owned or controlled through
ownership interests by a Party;

measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,
procedure, practice, decision, administrative action or any other form;

national means:
(a) in the case of Chile, a natural person who has the Chilean nationality as
defined in Article 10 of the Constitucion Politica de la Republica de Chile;

and

(b) in the case of Thailand, any person who possesses Thai nationality under the
law in force in the Kingdom of Thailand;

originating means qualifying under the rules of origin set out in Chapter 4 (Rules of
Origin);

person means a natural person or a juridical person;
person of a Party means a natural person or a juridical person of a Party;

preferential tariff treatment means the duty rate applicable under this Agreement to an
originating good;

Safeguards Agreement means the Agreement on Safeguards, contained in Annex IA to the
WTO Agreement;

SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

subheading means the first six digits in the tariff classification number under the
Harmonised System (HS);

TBT Agreement means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, contained in Annex
1A to the WTO Agreement;

territory means:

(a) in the case of Chile, the land, maritime, and air space under its sovereignty,
and the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf within which it
exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction in accordance with international
law and its domestic law; and

(b) in the case of Thailand, the territory of the Kingdom of Thailand, including its
internal waters, exclusive economic zone, the continental shelf and any other
maritime areas in which it exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction in
accordance with international law;

WTO means the World Trade Organisation; and

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organisation, done on April 15, 1994.

Chapter 3
Trade in Goods
Article 3.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

agricultural goods means those goods referred to in Article 2 of WTO Agreement on
Agriculture;

consular transactions means requirements that goods of a Party intended for export to the
territory of the other Party must first be submitted to the supervision of the consul of the
importing Party in the territory of the exporting Party for the purpose of obtaining consular
invoices or consular visas for commercial invoices, certificates of origin, manifests, shippers’
export declarations or any other customs documentation required on or in connection with
importation;

duty-free means free of customs duty;

export subsidies shall have the meaning assigned to that term in Article 1 (e) of WTO
Agreement on Agriculture, including any amendment of that Article; and

import licensing means administrative procedures requiring the submission of an application or
other documentation (other than that generally required for customs clearance purposes) to the
relevant administrative body as a prior condition for importation into the territory of the
importing Party.

Article 3.2: Scope and Coverage

Except as otherwise provided, this Chapter applies to trade in all goods between the
Parties.

Article 3.3: National Treatment

Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in accordance
with Article II] of GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. To this end, Article III of
GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement,
mutatis mutandis.

Article 3.4: Elimination of Customs Duties

l. The provisions of this Chapter concerning the elimination of customs duties on imports
shall apply to goods originating in the territory of the Parties.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, a Party shall not increase any existing
customs duty or introduce a new customs duty on an originating good covered by this
Agreement.

3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, and subject to a Party’s Schedule as set
out in Annex 3.4, as at the date of entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall eliminate
all customs duties on originating goods of the other Party.

4. If a Party reduces its applied most-favoured-nation customs duties rate with respect to
any product, listed in Annex 3.4, after the entry into force of this Agreement and before the end
of the tariff reduction and/or elimination period, the Parties shall consult to consider adjusting
the customs duties of such product to be consistent with the most-favoured-nation customs duties
rate reduction.

5. On the request of either Party, the Parties shall consult to consider accelerating the
elimination of customs duties set out in their Schedules in Annex 3.4. An agreement between the
Parties to accelerate the elimination of a customs duty on a good shall supersede any duty rate
determined pursuant to their Schedules in Annex 3.4 for such good when approved by each Party
in accordance with Article 13.1.4 (b) (Free Trade Commission).

6. A Party may at any time accelerate unilaterally the elimination of customs duties on
originating goods of the other Party set out in its Schedule in Annex 3.4. A Party considering
doing so shall inform the other Party as early as practicable.

Article 3.5: Administrative Fees and Formalities

1. Each Party shall ensure that fees, charges, formalities and requirements imposed in
connection with the importation and exportation of goods shall be consistent with its rights and
obligations under GATT 1994.

2. Each Party shall not require consular transactions, including related fees and charges, in
connection with the importation of any good of the other Party.

3. Each Party shall as much as possible, make available through the internet or a comparable
computer-based telecommunications network, a current list of the fees and charges it imposes in
connection with importation or exportation.

Article 3.6: Price Band System

Chile may maintain its price band system as established under its Law N° 18.525 or
succeeding system for the products covered by that law', provided it is applied consistent with
Chile’s rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement.

' For greater certainty, Chile shall not incorporate new products in the Price Band System. The products covered by
the price band system are HS (2007) 1001.9000, 1101.0000, 1701.1100, 1701.1200, 1701.9100, 1701.9910,
1701.9920 and 1701.9990.

Article 3.7: Agricultural Export Subsidies

1. The Parties share the objective of the multilateral elimination of all forms of export
subsidies for agricultural goods and shall cooperate in an effort to achieve such an agreement and
prevent their reintroduction in any form.

2. Neither Party shall introduce or maintain all forms of export subsidy on any agricultural
good destined for the territory of the other Party.

Article 3.8: Non-Tariff Measures

1. Each Party shall not adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of
any good of the other Party or on the exportation or sale for export of any good destined for the
territory of the other Party, except in accordance with its WTO rights and obligations or this
Agreement. To this end, Article XI of GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes shall be
incorporated into and shall form part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. The Parties understand that the rights and obligations in paragraph | prohibit a Party from
adopting or maintaining:

(a) export and import price requirements, except as permitted in enforcement of
countervailing and antidumping orders and undertakings;

(b) import licensing conditioned on the fulfilment of a performance requirement; or
(c) voluntary export restraints.

3. For transparency purposes, Chile recalls that it has notified to WTO the Law 18.483 or its
successor on measures concerning the importation of used vehicles.

4. Each Party shall ensure the transparency of its non-tariff measures permitted in paragraph
1 and shall ensure that any such measures are not prepared, adopted or applied with a view to or
with the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

Article 3.9: Committee on Trade in Goods

l. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade in Goods (hereinafter referred to as
“the Committee’), comprising of representatives of the Parties.

2. To facilitate communications between the Parties on any matter relating to this Chapter,
each Party shall designate a contact point. Where a Party considers that any proposed or actual
measure of the other Party may materially affect trade in goods between the Parties, that Party
may, through the contact point, request detailed information relating to that measure.

3, The functions of the Committee shall be:

(a) reviewing and monitoring the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

(b) considering any issue related to this Chapter;

(c) receiving reports from, and reviewing the work of the Committee on Rules of
Origin established pursuant to Article 4.14 (Committee on Rules of Origin);

(d) — establishing any working groups, as and when necessary;

(e) carrying out other functions as may be delegated by the Commission in
accordance with Chapter 13 (Administration and Institutional Provisions);

(f) identifying and recommending measures to promote and facilitate improved
market access, including any acceleration of tariff commitments under Article 3.4;

(g) addressing barriers to trade in goods between the Parties, especially those related
to the application of non-tariff measures, and, if appropriate, referring such
matters to the Commission for its consideration; and

(h) — reporting the findings and the outcome of discussions to the Commission.

4. The Committee shall meet at such venue and time as may be agreed by the Parties.

Meetings may be held via teleconference, videoconference or through any other means as
mutually determined by the Parties.

Chapter 4
Rules of Origin
Section 1
Determination of Origin
Article 4.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:

aquaculture means the farming of aquatic organisms including fish, molluscs, crustaceans, other
aquatic invertebrates and aquatic plants, from seedstock such as eggs, fry, fingerlings and larvae,
by intervention in the rearing or growth processes to enhance production such as regular
stocking, feeding, or protection from predators;

CIF means the value of the good imported and includes the cost of insurance and freight up to
the port or place of entry in the country of importation. The valuation shall be made in
accordance with Article VII of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on the Implementation of Article
VII of GATT 1994 as contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

competent authority means the authority that, according to the legislation of each Party, is
responsible for the issuing of the certificate of origin and may designate the issuance of the
certificate of origin into other entities or bodies. In the case of Chile, the General Directorate of
International Economic Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and in the case of Thailand, the
Ministry of Commerce, or an authority succeeding this Ministry;

exporter means a natural or juridical person located in the territory of a Party, where a good is
exported from, by such a person;

FOB means the free-on-board value of the good, inclusive of the cost of transport to the port or
site of final shipment abroad. The valuation shall be made in accordance with Article VII of
GATT 1994 and the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of GATT 1994 as
contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

fungible goods and materials means goods or materials that are interchangeable for commercial
purposes and whose properties are essentially identical;

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) means the recognised consensus or
substantial authoritative support in the territory of a Party, with respect to the recording of
revenues, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities; the disclosure of information; and the
preparation of financial statements. These standards may encompass broad guidelines of general
application as well as detailed standards, practices and procedures;

goods means any materials and/or products which can be wholly obtained or produced, or
manufactured, even if they are intended for later use as material in another manufacturing
operation;

importer means a natural or juridical person located in the territory of a Party where a good is
imported into, by such a person;

indirect materials means a good used in the production, testing or inspection of another good
but not physically incorporated into the good, or a good used in the maintenance of buildings or
the operation of equipment associated with the production of a good;

material means a good or any matter or substance such as raw materials, ingredients, parts,
components, sub-components or sub-assemblies that are used or consumed in the production of
goods or transformation of another good or are subject to a process in the production of another
good;

originating goods or originating material means goods or material that qualifies as originating
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter;

packing materials and containers for shipment means goods used to protect a good during its
transportation, different from those containers and packages and packing materials used for retail
sale;

product specific rules means rules that specify that the materials have undergone a change in
tariff classification or a specific manufacturing or processing operation, or satisfy a Qualifying
Value Content (QVC) criterion or a combination of any of these criteria; and

production means methods of obtaining goods including, but not limited to growing, raising,
mining, harvesting, fishing, farming, trapping, hunting, capturing, aquaculture, gathering,
collecting, breeding, extracting, manufacturing, processing or assembling a good.

Article 4.2: Origin Criteria

Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, a good shall qualify as an originating
good of a Party where:

(a) the good is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the Party, as defined in Article
4.3;

(b) the good is produced entirely in the Party exclusively from originating materials
of the Parties; or

Cc the good satisfies the product specific rules set out in Annex 4.2, when the good is
g Pp Pp 8
produced entirely in the Party using non-originating materials in whole or in part.

Additionally, the good shall meet all applicable requirements of this Chapter.

Article 4.3: Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

The following goods shall be considered as wholly obtained or produced entirely in the
territory of a Party:

(a) plants, plant goods and vegetable goods grown and harvested, picked or gathered
in the territory of the Party;

(b) — live animals born and raised in the territory of the Party;
(c) goods obtained from live animals referred to in subparagraph (b);

(d) goods obtained from hunting, trapping, fishing, aquaculture, gathering or
capturing and farming conducted in the territory of the Party;

(e) micro-organisms and viruses from natural habitats or cultivate in the territory of
the Party;

(f) minerals and other naturally occurring substances, not included in subparagraphs
(a) to (e), extracted or taken from its soil, water, seabed or beneath the seabed of
the Party;

(g) goods of sea-fishing taken by vessels registered with a Party and entitled to fly its
flag and other goods” extracted or taken from the waters, seabed or beneath the
seabed outside the territorial waters of that Party, provided that Party has the
rights to exploit such waters, seabed and beneath the seabed in accordance with
international law;

(h) — goods such as fish, shellfish and other marine life or marine goods taken from the
high seas by vessels registered and entitled to fly the flag of that Party;

(1) goods obtained, processed or produced on board a factory ship registered with that
Party and entitled to fly the flag of that Party, exclusively from products referred
to in subparagraph (g) and (h);

(j) waste or scrap collected or derived from production in the territory of the Party
and are fit only for the recovery of raw materials;

(k) used goods and goods collected there which can no longer perform their original
purpose nor are capable of being restored or repaired and are fit only for disposal
or recovery of parts of raw materials, or for recycling purposes; and

(1) goods obtained or produced in the territory of a Party solely from goods referred
to in subparagraphs (a) to (k).

* Other goods refers to minerals and other naturally occurring substances.

Article 4.4: Qualifying Value Content (QVC)

1. The QVC of a good shall be calculated as follows:

V- VNM
QVC = ------------------------------ x 100
V
where:
QVC _ - is the qualifying value content expressed as a percentage;
Vv - 1s the FOB value of the final good; and
VNM_~ -_ is the CIF value of the non-originating materials.

2. For the purposes of calculating the QVC provided in paragraph 1, VNM shall be:

(a) the CIF value at the time of importation of the goods; or

(b) — the earliest ascertained price paid for the goods of undetermined origin in the
territory of the Party where the working or processing takes place.

Article 4.5: Indirect Materials

Any indirect material used in the production of a good but not incorporated into the good
shall be treated as originating materials, irrespective of whether such indirect material originates
from a non-Party, including:

(a) fuel, energy, catalysts and solvents;

(b) equipment, devices and supplies used for testing or inspection of the goods;

(c) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and supplies;

(d) tools, dies and moulds;

(e) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;

(f) lubricants, greases, compounding materials and other materials used in production
or used to operate equipment and buildings; and

(g) any other materials which are not incorporated into the good but whose use in the
production of the good can reasonably be demonstrated to be a part of that
production.

Article 4.6: Minimal Operations and Processes that do not Confer Origin

The following minimal operations or processes, undertaken exclusively by itself or in
combination, do not confer origin:

(a) operations to ensure the preservation of products in good condition during
transport and storage such as drying, freezing, keeping in brine, ventilation,

chilling and like operations;

(b) — sifting, classifying, washing, cutting, slitting, bending, coiling or uncoiling,
sharpening, simple grinding, slicing;

(c) cleaning, including removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;
(d) painting and polishing operations;
(e) testing or calibration;

(f) placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards and
all other simple packaging operations;

(g) simple? mixing of goods, whether or not of different kinds;
(h) simple? assembly of parts of products to constitute a complete good;

(1) changes of packing, unpacking or repacking operations, and breaking up and
assembly of consignments;

(j) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on
goods or their packaging;

(k) = mere dilution with water or another substance that does not materially alter the
characteristics of the goods;

(1) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing and glazing of cereals and rice;
(m) disassembly; and

(n) mere making-up of sets of goods.

> “Simple” generally describes an activity which does not need special skills, machines, apparatus or equipment
especially produced or installed for carrying out the activity. However, simple mixing does not include chemical
reaction. Chemical reaction means a process (including a bio-chemical process) which results in a molecule with a
new structure by breaking intra molecular bonds and by forming new intra molecular bonds, or by altering the
spatial arrangement of atoms in a molecule.

Article 4.7: Accumulation

Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, originating goods of a Party which are used
in the processing or production in the territory of the other Party as material for finished goods,
shall be deemed as an originating material in the territory of the latter Party where the working or
processing of the finished goods has taken place.

Article 4.8: De Minimis

1. A good that does not undergo a change in tariff classification shall be considered as
originating if:

(a) the value of all non-originating materials used in its production that do not
undergo the required change in tariff classification do not exceed ten percent
(10%) of the FOB value of the good; and

(b) the good meets all other applicable criteria set forth in this Chapter for qualifying
as originating goods.

2. The value of non-originating materials referred to in paragraph | shall, however, be
included in the value of non-originating materials for any applicable QVC requirement for the
good.

Article 4.9: Fungible Goods and Materials

1. The determination of whether fungible goods or materials are originating goods shall be
made either by physical segregation of each of the materials, or through the use of an inventory
management method recognised in the GAAP of the Party in which the production is performed
or otherwise accepted by that Party.

2. Once a decision has been taken on the inventory management method, the method of
inventory management chosen by the exporter must be maintained throughout the fiscal year.

Article 4.10: Accessories, Spare Parts, Tools and Instructional or Information Materials

l. If the goods are subject to the requirements of a change in tariff classification or specific
manufacturing or processing operation, the origin of accessories, spare parts, tools, instructional
or other information materials delivered with a good that form part of the good’s standard
accessories, spare parts, or tools, shall be regarded as a part of the good, and shall be disregarded
in determining whether or not all the non-originating materials used in the production of the
originating goods undergo the applicable change in tariff classification provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, tools, instructional or other information materials are
classified with, and not invoiced separately from, the good; and

(b) the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts, tools, instructional or other
information materials are customary for the good.

2. If the goods are subject to QVC requirement, the value of the accessories, spare parts,
tools, and instructional or information materials shall be taken into account as the value of
originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, in calculating the QVC of the goods.

Article 4.11: Treatment of Packages, Packing Materials and Containers
1. Packages and packing materials for retail sale:

(a) If a good is subject to the QVC as set out in Annex 4.2, the value of the packages
and packing materials for retail sale, shall be taken into account in determining the
origin of that good as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, provided
that the packages and packing materials are considered to be forming a whole with
the good; and

(b) If a good is subject to the change in tariff classification criterion as set out in
Annex 4.2, packages and packing materials classified together with the packaged

good, shall not be taken into account in determining origin.

2. The containers and packing materials exclusively used for the transport of a good shall
not be taken into account for determining the origin of the said good.

Article 4.12: Direct Consignment

1. The goods shall be deemed as directly consigned from the exporting Party to the
importing Party:
(a) if the goods are transported without passing through the territory of any non-
Party; or

(b) if the goods are transported for the purpose of transit through a non-Party with or
without transshipment or temporary storage in such non-Party, provided that:

(1) the goods have not entered into trade or consumption in the territory of the
non-Party;

(ii) — the transit entry is justified for geographical reason or by consideration
related to transport requirements; and

(111) | the goods have not undergone any operation in the territory of the non-
Party other than unloading, reloading or any operation required to keep the
goods in good condition.

2. The directly consigned goods shall retain its originating status.

3. In the case where the originating goods of the exporting Party is imported through one or
more non-Parties, the customs authority of the importing Party may require importers, who claim
the preferential tariff treatment for the goods, to submit the following documentation to the
customs authorities of the importing Party:

(a) a Through Bill of Lading or similar documents used in multimodal transportation;
and

(b) supporting documents, if any, in evidence that the requirements of subparagraphs
1 (b) (4), (41) and (111) are being complied with.

Article 4.13: Certificate of Origin

A claim that goods are eligible for preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement shall
be supported by a Certificate of Origin issued by the exporting Party in the form as prescribed in
Section A of Annex 4.13 (Form of Certificate of Origin of Chile, issued by its competent
authority) or Section B of Annex 4.13 (Form of Certificate of Origin of Thailand, issued by its
competent authority).

Article 4.14: Committee on Rules of Origin

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Rules of Origin (hereinafter referred to as
“the Committee’), comprising of government representatives of each Party.

2. The functions of the Committee shall be to:
(a) monitor and review the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

(b) report its findings to the Committee on Trade in Goods in accordance with Article
3.9 (Committee on Trade in Goods);

(c) identify areas, relating to this Chapter to be improved for facilitating trade in
goods between the Parties;

(d) consider any other matters as Parties may agree related to this Chapter; and

(e) carry out other functions as may be delegated by the Commission in accordance
with Article 13.1.4 (Free Trade Commission).

3. The Committee shall meet at such venues and times as may be agreed by the Parties.

Section 2
Operational Procedures

Article 4.15: Certification of Origin

1. The Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the respective competent authority of each
Party.
2. Each Party shall inform the other Party of the name, address, and specimen of official

seals of its competent authorities, in hard copy and soft copy format. Any change in names,
addresses, or seals shall be promptly informed in the same manner.

3. For the purposes of checking the Certificate of Origin:

(a) Chile shall provide websites with some key information of the Certificate of
Origin issued by Chile such as Reference Number, HS code, description of goods,
date of issuance, quantity and name of the exporter; and

(b) Thailand shall provide information on specimen signatures in hard or soft copy
formats upon request and shall provide prompt update where appropriate.

To the best of its competence and ability, Thailand shall endeavour to provide
websites in the same information as specified above by Chile. The Committee
shall consult on the implementation of the websites.

4. The issued Certificate of Origin shall be applicable to a single importation of an
originating good of the exporting Party into the importing Party and be valid for twelve (12)
months from the date of issuance.

5. The original of the Certificate of Origin shall be submitted to customs authorities at the
time the declaration of the goods is made in accordance with the respective laws and regulations
of the importing Party.

6. The Parties, to the extent possible, should implement an electronic system for issuance of
Certificate of Origin. The Parties also recognise the validity of the electronic signature.

Article 4.16: Certificate of Origin

l. In the case of Chile, the Certificate of Origin shall be in 216 mm x 313 mm size paper
and in conformity to the form as shown in Section A of Annex 4.13.

2. In the case of Thailand, the Certificate of Origin shall be in ISO A4 size paper and in
conformity to the form as shown in Section B of Annex 4.13. The Certificate of Origin shall
comprise one (1) original and two (2) carbon copies (Duplicate and Triplicate). The original
copy shall be forwarded by the exporter to the importer for submission to the customs authority

at the port or place of importation. The duplicate shall be retained by the competent authority in
the exporting Party. The triplicate shall be retained by the exporter.

3. The Certificate of Origin shall be made in the English language.

4. Each Certificate of Origin shall bear a serial reference number separately given by each
place or office of issuance.

5. Unused spaces in the Certificate of Origin shall be crossed out by the competent authority
to prevent any subsequent addition.

Article 4.17: Application for Certificate of Origin

1. At the time of carrying out the formalities for exporting the goods under preferential
treatment, the exporter or its authorised representative shall submit a written application for the
Certificate of Origin together with appropriate supporting documents proving that the goods to
be exported fulfil the originating criteria under this Agreement.

2. For the purposes of determining originating status, the competent authorities shall have
the right to request supporting documentary evidence or to carry out check(s) considered
appropriate in accordance with respective laws and regulations of a Party.

Article 4.18: Obligations of the Competent Authority

The competent authority shall carry out proper examination upon each application for the
Certificate of Origin to ensure that:

(a) the application and the Certificate of Origin are duly completed and signed by the
authorised signatory;

(b) the origin of the good is in conformity with this Agreement;

(c) other statements on the Certificate of Origin correspond to the supporting
documentary evidence submitted;

(d) description, quantity and weight of goods, marks and number of packages,
number and kinds of packages, as specified, conform to the goods to be exported;
and

(e) multiple items declared on the same Certificate of Origin shall be allowed,
provided that each item qualifies separately in its own right.

Article 4. 19: Treatment of Erroneous Declaration in the Certificate of Origin

Neither erasures nor superimpositions shall be allowed on the Certificate of Origin. Any
alteration shall be made by:

(a) striking out the erroneous materials and making any addition required. Such
alterations shall be approved by an official authorised to sign the Certificate of
Origin and certified by the competent authorities. Unused spaces shall be crossed
out to prevent any subsequent addition; or

(b) issuing a new Certificate of Origin to replace the erroneous one. The new
Certificate of Origin shall bear the reference number and the date of issuance of
the original Certificate of Origin. The words “replaced C/O No... issued date...”
shall be endorsed. The new Certificate of Origin shall take effect from the date of
issuance of the original Certificate of Origin.

Article 4.20: Issuance of the Certificate of Origin

1. The Certificate of Origin shall be issued prior to, at the time of exportation, or no later
than three (3) days after the time of exportation.

2. Where a Certificate of Origin has not been issued at the time of exportation or no later
than three (3) days from the declared shipment date, due to involuntary errors or omissions or
other valid causes, the Certificate of Origin may be issued retroactively but no longer than one
(1) year from the date of shipment and shall be duly and prominently marked “Issued
Retroactively”’.

Article 4.21: Loss of the Certificate of Origin

1. In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a Certificate of Origin, the exporter may apply
in writing to the issuing authorities for a certified true copy to be made out on the basis of the
export documents in their possession bearing the endorsement of the words “CERTIFIED TRUE
COPY” in Box 14. This copy shall bear the date of issuance of the original Certificate of Origin.

2. The certified true copy shall take effect from the date of issuance of the original
Certificate of Origin.

Article 4.22: Exceptions

l. In the case of consignments of goods originating in the exporting Party and not exceeding
US$200 FOB, the requirement of a Certificate of Origin may be waived provided that the
importation does not form part of one or more importations that may reasonably be considered to
have been undertaken or arranged for the purpose of avoiding the certification requirements of
this Chapter.

2. An importation of originating goods of the exporting Party, for which the customs
authority of the importing Party has waived the requirement for a Certificate of Origin.

Article 4.23: Treatment of Minor Discrepancies

1. The customs authority of the importing Party should disregard minor errors, such as slight
discrepancies or omissions, typing errors or overrunning the margin of the designated field,
provided that these minor errors may not affect the authenticity of the Certificate of Origin or the
accuracy of the information included in the Certificate of Origin.

2. Where the origin of the goods is not in doubt, tariff classification differences between the
statements made in the Certificate of Origin and those made in the documents submitted to the
customs authority of the importing Party for the purposes of carrying out the formalities for
importing the goods shall not ipso-facto invalidate the Certificate of Origin, if it does in fact
correspond to the goods submitted. The process on claiming the preferential tariff treatment shall
be subject to domestic laws and regulations.

3. For multiple items declared under the same Certificate of Origin, a problem with one of
the items listed shall not affect or delay the granting of preferential tariff treatment and customs
clearance of the remaining items listed in the Certificate of Origin.

Article 4.24: Claims for Preferential Tariff Treatment

1. For the purposes of claiming preferential tariff treatment, the importer shall submit to the
customs authority of the importing Party, an import declaration, a Certificate of Origin and other
documents as required in accordance with the laws and regulations of the importing Party.

2. In cases when a Certificate of Origin is rejected by the customs authority of the importing
Party, the Certificate of Origin shall be marked accordingly in Box 4 and the original Certificate
of Origin shall be returned to the competent authority within a reasonable period not exceeding
sixty (60) days. The competent authority shall be duly notified of the grounds for the denial of
preferential tariff treatment.

Article 4.25: Verification of Origin

l. For the purposes of determining whether a good imported from the exporting Party under
preferential tariff treatment qualifies as an originating good of the exporting Party, the customs
authority of the importing Party may request the competent authority of the exporting Party,
information relating to the origin of the good, where it has reasonable doubt as to the authenticity
of the Certificate of Origin or the accuracy of the information included in the Certificate of
Origin.

2. Where the customs authority of the importing Party requests the information under
paragraph 1, it shall provide the competent authority of the exporting Party with:

(a) the reasons why such verification is requested;
(b) the Certificate of Origin of the good or a copy thereof; and
(c) any information and documents as may be necessary for purposes of such request;

3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the competent authority of the exporting Party shall
provide the information requested within a period of six (6) months from the date of receipt of
the request. If the customs authority of the importing Party considers necessary, it may require
additional information relating to the origin of the good. If additional information is requested by
the customs authority of the importing Party, the competent authority of the exporting Party
shall, in accordance with the laws and regulations of the exporting Party, provide the information
requested within a period of three (3) months from the date of receipt of the request.

4. The request of information in accordance with paragraph | shall not preclude the use of
the verification method provided for in Article 4.26.

5. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall promptly transmit the information
requested to the customs authority of the importing Party which shall then determine whether or
not the goods concerned is originating. The entire process from the date of receipt of the request
of the information until the notification of the result shall be completed within one hundred and
eighty (180) days.

Article 4.26: Verification Visit

1. The customs authority of the importing Party may request the competent authority of the
exporting Party:
(a) to conduct a visit, whereby it shall deliver a written communication at least ninety

(90) days in advance of the proposed date of the visit, the receipt of which is to be
confirmed by the competent authority of the exporting Party. The competent
authority of the exporting Party shall request the written consent of the exporter or
the producer of the good in the exporting Party whose premises are to be visited;
and

(b) to provide information relating to the origin of the good in the possession of the
competent authority of the exporting Party during the visit pursuant to

subparagraph (a).
2. The communication referred to in paragraph | shall include:
(a) the identity of the customs authority issuing the communication;

(b) the name of the exporter/producer, whose premises are requested to be visited;

(c) the proposed date and place of the visit;

(d) the objective and scope of the proposed visit, including specific reference to the
good subject to the verification, referred in the Certificate of Origin; and

(e) the names and titles of the officials of the customs authority of the importing
Party to be present during the visit.

3. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall respond in writing to the importing
Party, within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the communication referred to in paragraph 2, if it
accepts or refuses to conduct the visit requested pursuant to paragraph 1.

4. For the compliance of subparagraph | (a), the competent authority of the exporting Party
shall cooperate by providing the necessary information and relevant documentations as well as
facilitating an on-site visit to the premises of the exporter or the producer of the goods in the
exporting Party.

5. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall, in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the exporting Party, provide information within sixty (60) days or any other
mutually agreed period from the last day of the visit, to the customs authority of the importing
Party pursuant to paragraph 1.

Article 4.27: Determination of Origin and Preferential Tariff Treatment

1. The customs authority of the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to a
good for which an importer claims preferential tariff treatment where the good does not qualify
as an originating good of the exporting Party or where the importer fails to comply with any of
the relevant requirements of this Chapter.

2. The customs authority of the importing Party may determine that a good does not qualify
as an originating good of the exporting Party and may deny preferential tariff treatment in the
following cases:

(a) where the competent authority of the exporting Party fails to respond to the
request within the period referred to in Articles 4.25.3 or 4.26.3;

(b) where the competent authority of the exporting Party refuses to conduct a visit, or
fails to respond to the communication referred to in Article 4.26.1 within the
period referred to in Article 4.26.3; or

(c) where the information provided to the customs authority of the importing Party
pursuant to Articles 4.25 or 4.26, is not sufficient to prove that the good qualifies
as an originating good of the exporting Party.

In such cases, a written determination thereof shall be sent to the competent authority of
the exporting Party.

3. After carrying out the procedures outlined in Articles 4.25 or 4.26 as the case may be, the
customs authority of the importing Party shall provide the competent authority of the exporting
Party with a written determination of whether or not the good qualifies as an originating good of
the exporting Party, including findings of fact and the legal basis for the determination, within
forty-five (45) days from the date of receipt of the information provided by the competent
authority of the exporting Party pursuant to Articles 4.25 or 4.26. The competent authority of the
exporting Party shall inform such determination by the customs authority of the importing Party
to the exporter of the good in the exporting Party, whose premises were subject to the visit
referred to in Article 4.26.

4. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall, when it cancels the decision to issue
the Certificate of Origin, promptly notify the cancellation to the exporter to whom the Certificate
of Origin has been issued, and to the customs authority of the importing Party except where the
Certificate of Origin has been returned to the competent authority of the exporting Party. The
customs authority of the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment when it receives
the notification.

Article 4.28: Records and Confidentiality

1. For the purposes of the verification process, the application for Certificates of Origin and
all documents related to such application shall be kept by the competent authorities and exporters
for five (5) years from the date of issuance of the Certificate of Origin.

2. Information relating to the validity of the Certificate of Origin shall be furnished upon
request of the importing Party by the appropriate authorities.

3. Any confidential information shall be treated as such in accordance with the Parties
domestic legislation and shall be used for the validation of Certificates of Origin purposes only.

4. The Parties shall maintain, in accordance with their laws and regulations, the
confidentiality of classified business information collected in the process of verification pursuant
to Articles 4.25 and 4.26 and shall protect that information from disclosure that could prejudice
the competitive position of the person who provided the information. The classified business
information may only be disclosed to those authorities responsible for the administration and
enforcement of origin determination.

5. All records identified in the preceding paragraphs of this Article may be maintained in
paper or electronic form in accordance with the domestic laws and regulations of each Party

Article 4.29: Exhibition

l. Originating goods, sent for exhibition in a country other than Chile or Thailand and sold
during or after the exhibition for importation in Chile or Thailand shall be deemed as originating
and eligible for preferential tariff treatment provided it is shown to the satisfaction of the
customs authority of the importing Party that:

(a) an exporter has consigned the goods from Chile or Thailand to the country in
which the exhibition is held and has exhibited there;

(b) the goods have been sold or transferred to a consignee or otherwise dispose of by
that exporter to an importer in Chile or Thailand;

(c) the goods have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in
the Party in which they were sent for exhibition and have not been used for a
purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition; and

(d) the goods have remained during the exhibition under customs control.

2. A Certificate of Origin must be issued or made out in accordance with this Chapter. The
name and address of the place of the exhibition must be indicated in the Certificate of Origin.
Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the conditions, under which they have
been exhibited, may be required from the relevant authorities of the country where the exhibition
took place.

3. Paragraph | shall apply to any trade, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar show
or display in shops or business premises with the view to the sale of foreign goods and where the
goods remain under customs control during the exhibition.

Article 4.30: Sanctions against False Declaration

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain appropriate sanctions against its exporters to whom
a Certificate of Origin has been issued, for providing false declaration or documents to the
competent authority of the exporting Party, prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Origin.

2. Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations, take measures which it
considers appropriate against its exporters to whom a Certificate of Origin has been issued if
they fail to notify in writing to the competent authority of the exporting Party without delay after
having known, after the issuance of the Certificate of Origin, that such good does not qualify as
originating goods of the exporting Party.

3. When the exporter repeatedly provided false information or documentation, the
competent authority may temporarily suspend the issuance of a new Certificate of Origin.

Article 4.31: Obligations of the Exporter

The exporter to whom a Certificate of Origin has been issued in the exporting Party
referred to in Article 4.15, shall notify in writing to the competent authority of the exporting
Party without delay when such exporter knows that such good does not qualify as originating
goods of the exporting Party.

Article 4.32: Obligations of the Importer

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the customs authority of the importing
Party shall require an importer who claims preferential tariff treatment for goods imported from
the other Party to:

(a) make a customs declaration, based on a valid Certificate of Origin, that the goods
qualify as originating goods of the exporting Party;

(b) have the Certificate of Origin in its possession at the time the declaration is made;

(c) provide the Certificate of Origin on the request of the customs authority of the
importing Party; and

(d) promptly notify the customs authority and pay any duties owing where the
importer has reason to believe that the Certificate of Origin on which a
declaration was based contains information that is not correct.

2. An importer claiming preferential tariff treatment for goods imported into the Party’s
territory shall maintain, at least for five (5) years after the date of importation of the goods, a
Certificate of Origin, and all other documents that the Party may require relating to the
importation of the goods, in accordance with the domestic laws and regulations.

Article 4.33: Customs Duty Refund

Each Party shall provide that, where a good would have qualified as originating goods
when it was imported into the territory of that Party but no claim for preferential tariff treatment
was made at that time, the importer may, subject to the relevant laws and regulations of the

importing Party, apply for a refund of any duties paid on presentation of:

(a) a written declaration that the good qualified as originating at the time of
importation;

(b) a Certificate of Origin; and

(c) such other documentations relating to the importation of the good as the importing
Party may require.

Article 4.34: Non-Party Invoices
l. For the purposes of granting preferential tariff treatment, the customs authority of the

importing Party shall accept Certificate of Origin in cases where the sale invoice is issued by a
non-Party operator, provided that the goods meet all the applicable requirements of this Chapter.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the exporter shall indicate “non-Party invoicing” and the
following information in the Certificate of Origin: name and legal address (including city and
country) of the non-Party operator.

3. In the case where a good is invoiced by a non-Party operator, the number and date of the
invoice issued by the exporter and the number and date of the invoice issued by the non-Party
operator (if known) shall be indicated in the Certificate of Origin.

Chapter 5
Customs Procedures
Section A
General Provision
Article 5.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

commercial samples means commercial samples having a negligible value, or no commercial
value, or so marked, torn, perforated or otherwise treated that they are unsuitable for sale or for
use except as commercial samples;

customs authority means the authority that according to the legislation of the country of each
Party is responsible for the administration and enforcement of its customs laws:

(a) in the case of Chile, the National Customs Service; and
(b) in the case of Thailand, the Customs Department;

customs laws mean such laws and regulations administered and enforced by the customs
authority of each Party concerning the importation, exportation, and transit/transshipment of
goods, as they relate to customs duties, charges, and other taxes, or to prohibitions, restrictions,
and other similar controls with respect to the movement of controlled items across the boundary
of the customs territory of each Party;

customs procedures means the treatment applied by the customs authority of each Party to
goods which are subject to customs control; and

printed advertising materials means those goods classified in Chapter 49 of the Harmonised
System (HS), including brochures, pamphlets, leaflets, trade catalogues, yearbooks published by
trade associations, trade and tourist promotional materials and posters, that are used to promote,
publicise or advertise a good or service, are essentially intended to advertise a good or service,
and/or are supplied free of charge.

Article 5.2: Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are to:
(a) simplify and harmonise customs procedures of the Parties;

(b) ensure consistency, predictability and transparency in the application of customs
laws and regulations of the Parties;

(c) ensure efficient and expeditious release of goods;

(d) facilitate trade in goods between the Parties by the use of information and
communications technology, taking into account international standards; and

(e) promote cooperation between the customs authorities with relevant international
standards and recommended practices such as those made under the auspices of
the Customs Cooperation Council.

Article 5.3: Scope and Coverage
1. This Chapter shall apply to customs procedures for goods traded between the Parties.
2. This Chapter shall be implemented by each Party in accordance with the laws and
regulations in force in each Party and within the competence and available resources of the
customs authorities of each Party
Section B

Customs Procedures and Facilitation
Article 5.4: Customs Procedures
1. Customs authorities of a Party shall ensure that its customs procedures and practices are
predictable, consistent, transparent and facilitate trade, including through the expeditious
clearance of goods and means of transport.
2. Customs procedures of a Party shall, where possible and to the extent permitted by their
respective customs laws, conform with the standards and recommended practices of the World

Customs Organisation (WCO) and other international organisation as relevant to customs.

3. The customs authority of a Party shall review its customs procedures and practices with a
view to their simplification to facilitate trade.

Article 5.5: Customs Valuation

The Parties shall apply the WTO Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of
GATT 1994 for the purposes of determining the customs value of goods traded between the
Parties.
Article 5.6: Advance Rulings
l. Customs authorities of each Party, shall issue written advance ruling prior to the

importation of a good into its territory upon written request of a person who intends to import in
or export to its territory, on the basis of the facts and circumstances provided by the requester,

including a detailed description of the information required to process a request for an advance
ruling, concerning:

(a) tariff classification;
(b) — valuation method; or
(c) whether a good qualifies as an originating good under this Agreement.

2. The customs authorities shall issue advance rulings after receiving a written request,
provided that the requester has submitted all necessary information. The issuance of advance
ruling shall be made within one hundred and twenty (120) days.

3. Each Party shall provide that advance rulings shall be in force from their date of issuance,
or such other specified by the ruling, for the period of time, in accordance with their domestic
laws and regulations, provided that the facts or circumstances on which the ruling is based
remain unchanged.

4. The customs authorities may modify or revoke an advance ruling where facts or
circumstances prove that the information on which the advance ruling is based is false or
inaccurate.

5. Where an importer claims that the treatment accorded to an imported good should be
governed by an advance ruling, the customs authorities may evaluate whether the facts and
circumstances of the importation are consistent with the facts and circumstances upon which an
advance ruling was based.

6. Each Party shall make its advance rulings publicly available, subject to confidentiality
requirements in its domestic law, for purposes of promoting the consistent application of advance
rulings to other goods.

7. If a requester provides false information or omits relevant circumstances or facts in its
request for an advance ruling, or does not act in accordance with the ruling’s terms and
conditions, the importing Party may apply appropriate measures, including civil, criminal, and
administrative actions, penalties, or other sanctions in accordance with its domestic laws.

Article 5.7: Customs Clearance
l. Each Party shall endeavour to apply customs procedures in a predictable, consistent and
transparent manner for the efficient release of goods in order to facilitate trade between the

Parties.

2. For prompt release of goods traded between the Parties, to the extent possible each Party
shall:

(a) provide for the release of goods within a period no greater than that required to
ensure compliance with its customs laws or regulations;

(b) make use of information and communications technology;

(c) adopt or maintain procedures allowing, to the extent possible, goods to be released
at the point of arrival, without temporary transfer to warehouses or other
locations;

(d) harmonise its customs procedures, as far as possible, with relevant international
standards and best practices, such as those recommended by the WCO; and

(e) adopt or maintain procedures allowing the release of goods prior to, and without
prejudice to, the final determination by its customs authority of the applicable
customs duties, taxes and fees, subject to domestic procedures.

Article 5.8: Risk Management

1. In order to facilitate release of goods traded between the countries of the Parties, the
customs authority of each Party shall use risk management methodology.

2. The customs authority of each Party shall exchange information, including best practices,
on risk management techniques and other enforcement techniques.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to adopt or maintain risk management systems that enable its
customs authority to concentrate inspection activities on high risk goods and that simplify the
clearance and movement of low risk goods.

Article 5.9: Temporary Admission

1. The Parties shall facilitate movement of goods under temporary admission to the greatest
extent possible.

2. The customs authorities of the Parties shall specify the period within which goods placed
under the temporary admission procedure must be re-exported or placed under a subsequent
customs procedure.

3. Where, in exceptional circumstances, the goods cannot be re-exported or placed under a
subsequent customs procedure within the specified period, the customs authorities concerned
may, at the request of the holder of the authorisation, extend those periods for a reasonable
duration.

Article 5.10: Goods Re-entered after Repair and Alteration

l. The Parties may, in accordance with their customs laws, not apply a customs duty to a
good, regardless of its origin, that re-enters its territory after that good has been temporarily

exported from its territory to the territory of the other Party for repair or alteration, regardless of
whether such repair or alteration could be performed in its own territory.

2. The Parties may, in accordance with their customs laws, not apply a customs duty to a
good, regardless of its origin, admitted temporarily from the territory of the other Party for repair
or alteration.

3. For the purposes of this Article, repair and alteration does not include an operation or
process that:

(a) destroys a good's essential characteristics or creates a new or commercially
different good; or

(b) transforms an unfinished good into a finished good.
Article 5.11: Duty-Free Entry of Commercial Samples and Printed Advertising Materials

Each Party shall, in accordance with its customs laws, grant duty-free entry to
commercial samples and to printed advertising materials imported from the territory of the other
Party regardless of their origin, but may require that:

(a) such samples be imported solely for the solicitation of orders for goods, or
services provided from the territory, of another Party or a non-Party; and

(b) such printed advertising materials are imported in packets that each contains no
more than one copy of each material and that neither such materials nor packets
form part of a larger consignment.

Article 5.12: Use of Automated System and Paperless Trading

1. The customs authorities of the Parties shall make cooperative efforts to promote the use
of information and communications technology in their customs procedures including sharing
best practices, for the purpose of improving their customs procedures.

2. The customs authorities of each Party, in implementing initiatives which provide for the
use of paperless trading, shall take into account the methods agreed by the WCO, including
adoption of the WCO data model for the simplification and harmonisation of data.

3. The customs authorities of each Party shall work towards having electronic means for all
its customs reporting requirements, as soon as practicable.

4. The introduction and enhancement of information technology shall, to the greatest extent
possible, be carried out in consultation with all relevant parties including business directly
affected.

Article 5.13: Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall ensure that with respect to its determinations on customs matters,
importers in its territory have access to:

(a) administrative review issued by a superior official different from who took the
determination; and

(b) judicial review of the determination or decision taken at the final level of
administrative review.

2. Notice of the decision on appeal shall be given to the appellant and the reasons for such
decision shall be provided in writing.

Article 5.14: Publication and Enquiry Points

1. Each Party shall designate one or more enquiry points to address enquiries from the other
Party concerning customs matters, and shall make available on the internet, or print form
information concerning procedures for making such enquiries.

2. Each Party shall endeavour to publish on the internet or in print form statutory and
regulatory provisions and procedures applicable or enforced by its customs authority.

3. Nothing in this Article shall require a Party to publish law enforcement procedures and
internal operational guidelines including those related to conducting risk analysis and targeting
technologies.

Article 5.15: Confidentiality

1. Each Party’s customs authority undertakes not to use any information received in
accordance with this Chapter other than for the purpose for which the information was given, or
to disclose any such information, except in cases where:

(a) the customs authority that furnished the information has expressly approved its
use or disclosure for other purposes related to this Chapter; or

(b) the domestic laws and regulations of the receiving customs authority requires
disclosure, in which case the receiving customs authority shall notify the customs
authority that furnished the information of the relevant law.

2. Any information received in accordance with this Chapter shall be treated as confidential
and will be subject to the same protection and confidentiality as the same kind of information is
subject to under the national law of the customs authority where it is received.

3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party to furnish or allow access to
information the disclosure of which would:

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

Article 5.16:

be contrary to the public interest as determined by its laws, rules or regulations;

be contrary to any of its laws, rules and regulations including but not limited to
those protecting personal privacy or the financial affairs and accounts of
individuals;

impede law enforcement; or

prejudice legitimate commercial interest, which may include competitive position,
particular juridical persons, whether public or private.

Penalties and Sanctions

Each Party shall maintain measures for the imposition of civil or administrative penalties
or sanctions and, where appropriate, criminal sanctions for violations of its customs laws and
other laws relating to customs according to their domestic laws.

Article 5.17:

Customs Cooperation and Mutual Assistance

The Parties agree to negotiate a memorandum of understanding on cooperation and
mutual assistance in customs matters through their respective customs authorities no later than
one (1) year after the entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 5.18:

Committee on Customs Procedures

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Customs Procedures (hereinafter referred to
as “the Committee’).

2. The functions of the Committee shall be:
(a) reviewing the implementation and operation of this Chapter;
(b) reporting the finding of the Committee to the Commission;
(c) identifying areas to be improved for facilitating trade between the Parties;
(d) consulting for the problems which could be found during the implementation of
this Chapter; and
(e) carrying out other functions which may be delegated by the Commission.
3. The Committee shall be composed of representatives from the customs authorities of the

Parties. The Committee shall meet at such venues and times as may be agreed by the Parties.

Article 6.1:

Chapter 6
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

Article 6.2:

the definitions in Annex A of the SPS Agreement are incorporated into this
Chapter and shall form part of this Chapter, mutatis mutandis; and

the relevant definitions developed by the Codex Alimentarius Commission
(hereinafter referred to as “Codex”), World Organisation for Animal Health
(hereinafter referred to as “OIE”) and the International Plant Protection
Convention (hereinafter referred to as “IPPC’’) apply to the implementation of this
Chapter.

Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Article 6.3:

facilitate bilateral trade in food, plants and animals, including their products,
while protecting human, animal or plant life or health in the territory of each
Party;

strengthen the area of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS) with the views
to protecting of human, animal health and controlling the spread of infectious
diseases of animals and pests of plants from the territory of one Party to the
territory of the other Party;

ensure and enhance implementation of the SPS Agreement and applicable
international standards, guidelines and recommendations developed by the
relevant international organisations;

increase mutual understanding of each Party’s national laws, regulations and
procedures relating to the implementation of sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

and

provide means to improve communications, cooperation and solve sanitary and
phytosanitary issues arising from the implementation of this Agreement.

Scope and Coverage

This Chapter applies to all SPS measures of a Party that may, directly or indirectly, affect
human, animal and plant health and trade between the Parties.

Article 6.4: General Obligations

1. The Parties affirm their rights and obligations with respect to each other under the SPS
Agreement.
2. The Parties may cooperate in relevant international bodies engaged in SPS issues,

including the WTO Committee on SPS, Codex, OIE, and IPPC.
Article 6.5: Cooperation
1. The Parties agree to cooperate to facilitate the implementation of this Chapter.

2. The Parties shall explore opportunities for further cooperation, collaboration, and
information exchange on SPS matters of mutual interest, consistent with the provisions of this
Chapter.

Article 6.6: Equivalence

1. The Parties recognise the application of equivalence as an important tool for trade
facilitation for the mutual benefit of both Parties.

2. Upon request, the Parties may enter into discussions with the aim of achieving bilateral
recognition of the equivalence of specified SPS measures in line with the principle of
equivalence in the SPS Agreement and other standards, guidelines or recommendations by the
relevant international organisations.

Article 6.7: Risk Assessment

1. The Parties recognise the principle of risk assessment as provided for under the SPS
Agreement. SPS measures adopted by the Parties will be based on assessment of the risk existing
for human, animal health and infectious diseases of animals and pests of plants in accordance
with the risk analysis techniques adopted by the relevant organisations.

2. The initiation of a risk assessment process should not interrupt the bilateral trade of that
product, except in case of a justified emergency situation.

Article 6.8: Consultations on SPS Measures

l. At the request of a Party for consultations on any matter arising under this Chapter, the
Parties shall agree to enter into consultations by notifying the contact points listed in Annex 6.10.

2. Consultations will be carried out within thirty (30) days of receiving the notification,
unless otherwise agreed by the Parties. Such consultations may be conducted via
teleconferencing, videoconferencing, or any other means mutually agreed by the Parties.

3. If the consultations have failed to achieve resolution the matter is subsequently referred to
the dispute settlement procedure contained in Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement), the consultations
under this Article shall replace those provided in Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement).

Article 6.9: Relation to the Agreement of Technical Cooperation on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures

In the event of any inconsistency between a provision of this Chapter and a provision of
the Agreement of Technical Cooperation on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures between the
Government of the Republic of Chile and the Government of the Kingdom of Thailand, done in
Bangkok on August 15, 2012, the former shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 6.10: Competent Authorities and Contact Points

1. The competent authorities responsible for the implementation of the measures referred to
in this Chapter are listed in Section A of Annex 6.10. The contact points that have the
responsibility relating to communications between the Parties are set out in Section B of Annex
6.10.

2. The Parties shall inform each other of any significant changes in the structure and
organisation of the competent authorities or contact points.

Article 6.11: Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The Parties hereby agree to establish a Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures (hereinafter referred to as “the Committee”) with the objective of ensuring the
implementation of this Chapter. The Committee shall be comprised of representatives of each
Party who have responsibilities for the development, implementation, and enforcement of SPS
measures.

2. The Parties shall establish the Committee as soon as possible and no later than one (1)
year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement through an exchange of letters.

3. The Committee shall seek to enhance and ensure cooperation between the Parties’
agencies with responsibility for SPS measures.

4. The functions of the Committee shall be to provide a forum for:

(a) enhancing mutual understanding of each Party’s SPS measures and the regulatory
processes related to those measures;

(b) discussing matters related to the development or application of SPS measures of a
Party that may, directly or indirectly, affect human, animal and plant health and
trade between the Parties;

(c) addressing any bilateral issues arising from the implementation of SPS measures
between the Parties;

(d) reviewing progress on addressing bilateral issues arising from the implementation
of SPS measures between the Parties;

(e) exchanging information on: relevant laws and regulations; the occurrence and
control of infectious diseases of animals and pests of plants; and notifying
emerging situations;

(f) coordinating technical cooperation programmes on SPS measures; and

(g) consulting on issues relating to the meetings of the WTO Committee on SPS,
Codex, OIE and IPPC.

5. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, the Committee shall meet annually in person, if

it’s necessary. It may meet via teleconference, video conference, or through any other means, as
mutually determined by the Parties.

6. To guide its operation, the Committee shall establish its own rules of procedure at its first
meeting. These rules may be revised or further developed at any time.

7. The Committee may agree to establish ad hoc technical working groups in accordance
with its rules of procedure.

Chapter 7
Technical Barriers to Trade
Article 7.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions of Annex | of the TBT Agreement
shall apply.

Article 7.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to increase and facilitate trade through the
improvement of the implementation of the TBT Agreement, the elimination of unnecessary
technical barriers to trade and the enhancement of bilateral cooperation.
Article 7.3: Scope and Coverage

For the mutual benefit of the Parties, this Chapter applies to all standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures of the Parties that may, directly or

indirectly, affect trade in goods between the Parties except:

(a) purchasing specifications prepared by governmental bodies for the
production or consumption requirements of such bodies; and

(b) sanitary or phytosanitary measures as defined in Chapter 6 (Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures).

Article 7.4: Affirmation of the TBT Agreement

The Parties affirm their rights and obligations with respect to each other Party
under the TBT Agreement.

Article 7.5: Standards
1. With respect to the preparation, adoption and application of standards, each Party
shall ensure that its standardising body or bodies accept and comply with Annex 3 of the
TBT Agreement.
2. Each Party should encourage the standardising body or bodies in its territory to
cooperate with the standardising body or bodies of other Party. Such cooperation may
include:

(a) exchange of information on standards;

(b) exchange of information relating to standard setting procedures; and

(c) cooperation in the work of international standardising bodies in areas of
mutual interest.

Article 7.6: International Standards

In determining whether an international standard, guide or recommendation within
the meaning of Articles 2 and 5 and Annex 3 of the TBT Agreement exists, each Party
shall apply the principles set out in Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the
Committee since 1 January 1995, G/TBT/1/Rev.9, 8 September 2008, Annex B Part I
(Decision of the Committee on Principles for the Development of International Standards,
Guides and Recommendations with relation to Articles 2, 5 and Annex 3 of the
Agreement), issued by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade.

Article 7.7: Trade Facilitation

The Parties shall work cooperatively in the fields of standards, technical regulations
and conformity assessment procedures with a view to facilitating trade between the Parties.
In particular, the Parties shall seek to identify trade facilitating bilateral initiatives
regarding standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures that are
appropriate for particular issues or sectors. Such initiatives may include:

(a) cooperation on regulatory issues, such as convergence or equivalence of
technical regulations and standards;

(b) alignment with international standards; and
(c) use of the approaches as defined in Article 7.9.
Article 7.8: Technical Regulations

1. Each Party shall give positive consideration to accepting as equivalent technical
regulations of the other Party, even if these regulations differ from its own, provided it is
satisfied that these regulations adequately fulfil the objectives of its own regulations.

2. Where a Party does not accept a technical regulation of the other Party as
equivalent to its own, it shall, upon request of the other Party, explain the reasons for its
decision.

Article 7.9: Conformity Assessment Procedures

1. Each Party should seek to enhance the acceptance of the results of conformity
assessment procedures conducted in the territory of the other Party with a view to
increasing efficiency, avoiding duplication and ensuring cost effectiveness of the
conformity assessments. In this regard, each Party may choose, depending on the situation
of the Party and the specific sectors involved, a broad range of approaches. These may
include:

(a) recognition by a Party of the results of conformity assessments performed in
the other Party’s territory;

(b) recognition of arrangements between accreditation bodies in the territories
of the Parties;

(c) Mutual Recognition Agreements (MRAs) for conformity assessment to
specific regulations: agreements on mutual acceptance of the results of
conformity assessment procedures conducted by bodies located in the
territory of the other Party;

(d) use of accreditation to qualify conformity assessment bodies located in the
territory of the other Party;

(e) use of existing international multilateral recognition agreements and
arrangements;

(f) designating conformity assessment bodies located in the territory of the
other Party;

(g)  suppliers' declaration of conformity; and

(h) voluntary arrangements between conformity assessments bodies located in
each Party’s territory.

2. The Parties shall exchange information on these and other similar approaches with
a view to facilitating acceptance of conformity assessment results.

3. Where a Party does not accept the results of a conformity assessment procedure
conducted in the territory of the other Party, it shall, on request of that other Party, explain
the reasons for its decision.

4. Each Party may accredit, approve, license, or otherwise recognise conformity
assessment bodies in the territory of the other Party on terms no less favourable than those
it accords to conformity assessment bodies in its territory. Where a Party accredits,
approves, licenses, or otherwise recognises a body assessing conformity with a specific
technical regulation or standard in its territory and refuses to accredit, approve, license, or
otherwise recognise a body assessing conformity with that technical regulation or standard
in the territory of the other Party, it shall, on request of that other Party, explain the reasons
for its decision.

5. Where a Party declines a request from the other Party to engage in negotiations or
conclude an agreement on facilitating recognition in its territory of the results of
conformity assessment procedures conducted by bodies in the other Party’s territory, it
shall, on request of that other Party, explain the reasons for its decision.

Article 7.10: Transparency

1. Each Party affirms its commitment to ensuring that information regarding proposed
new or amended standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures is
made available in accordance with the relevant requirements of the TBT Agreement.

2. Each Party shall ensure that the information relating to standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures is published. Such information should
be made available in printed form and, where possible, in electronic form. In the case of

voluntary standards, the access to the text is dependent upon the conditions of the
standardisation bodies.

3. The Parties acknowledge the importance of transparency in decision-making,
including providing a meaningful opportunity for persons to provide comments on
proposed technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures. Where a Party
publishes a notice under Article 2.9 or 5.6 of the TBT Agreement, it shall:

(a) include in the notice a statement describing the objective of the proposed
technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure and the rationale
for the approach the Party is proposing; and

(b) transmit the proposal electronically to the other Party through the enquiry
point the Party has established under Article 10 of the TBT Agreement at
the same time as it notifies WTO Members of the proposal pursuant to the
TBT Agreement.

Each Party should allow at least sixty (60) days after it transmits a proposal under
subparagraph (b) for the public and the other Party to make comments in writing on the
proposal.

4. Where a Party makes a notification under Article 2.10 or 5.7 of the TBT
Agreement, it shall at the same time transmit the notification to the other Party
electronically through the enquiry point referenced in subparagraph 3 (b).

5. Each Party is encouraged to make available, upon request and where possible, to
the other Party, in print or electronically, its responses to significant comments it receives
under paragraph 1 no later than the date it publishes the final technical regulation or
conformity assessment procedure.

6. On request of a Party, the other Party shall provide information regarding the
objective of, and rationale for, a standard, technical regulation or conformity assessment
procedure that it has adopted or is proposing to adopt.

Article 7.11: Technical Cooperation

With a view to fulfil the objectives of this Chapter, the Parties shall, on the request
of the other Party, cooperate in mutually determined terms and conditions. This may
include:

(a) exchanging legislation, regulations, rules and other information and
periodicals published by the national bodies responsible for technical
regulations, standards, conformity assessment procedures, metrology and
accreditation;

(b) providing technical advice, information, assistance and exchanging
experience to enhance the other Party’s system for standards, technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures, and related activities;

(c) examining the compatibility and/or equivalence of their respective technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures;

(d) cooperation between conformity assessment bodies, both governmental and
non-governmental, in the territory of each Party, enhancing infrastructure in
calibration, testing, inspection, certification and accreditation to meet
relevant international standards, recommendations and guidelines;

(e) increasing their bilateral cooperation in the relevant international
organisations and fora dealing with the issues covered by this Chapter;

(f) enhancing cooperation in the development and improvement of technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures such as:

(1) cooperation in the development and promotion of good regulatory
practice; and

(ii) transparency, including ways to promote improved access to
information on standards, technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures;

(g) giving favourable consideration, on request of the other Party, to any sector
specific proposal for further cooperation; and

(h) informing the other Party, as requested, about the agreements or

programmes subscribed at international level in relation to Technical
Barriers to Trade issues.

Article 7.12: Consultations

1. Each Party shall give prompt and positive consideration to any request from the
other Party for consultations on issues relating to the implementation of this Chapter.

2. Where a matter covered under this Chapter cannot be clarified or resolved as a
result of consultations, the Party concerned may refer the matter to the Committee on
Technical Barriers to Trade.

Article 7.13: Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

1. The Parties hereby agree to establish a Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade
(hereinafter referred to as “the Committee”), which shall be composed of representatives of
the Parties. The Committee shall report to the Commission of its activities.

2. For the purposes of this Article, the Committee shall be coordinated by:

(a) in the case of Chile, the General Directorate of International Economic
Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or its successor; and

(b) in the case of Thailand, the Secretary-General of Thai Industrial Standards
Institute, Ministry of Industry, or its successor.

3. In order to facilitate the communications, the Parties will designate a contact point
no later than two (2) months following the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

4. Each Party shall ensure that its contact point or contact points facilitate the
exchange of information between the Parties on standards, technical regulations and
conformity assessment procedures, in response to all reasonable requests for such
information from a Party.

5. The Committee may address any matter related to the effective functioning of this
Chapter. The responsibilities and functions of the Committee shall include:

(a) monitoring and reviewing the implementation and administration of this
Chapter;

(b) promptly addressing any issue that a Party raises related to the preparation,
adoption and application of standards, technical regulations or conformity
assessment procedures;

(c) enhancing cooperation in the development and improvement of standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

(d) providing a forum for discussions and exchanging information on Parties’
systems for standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment
procedures;

(e) exchanging information on developments in non-governmental, regional,
and multilateral fora engaged in activities related to standardisation and
conformity assessment procedures;

(f) exploring any means aimed at improving access to the Parties’ respective
markets and enhancing the functioning of this Chapter;

(g) consulting on any matter arising under this Chapter, upon a Party's request;
and

(h) reviewing this Chapter in light of any developments under the TBT
Agreement, and developing recommendations for amendments to this
Chapter in light of those developments.

6. Where the Parties have had recourse to consultations under paragraph 5 (g) such
consultations shall, on the agreement of the Parties, constitute consultations under Article
14.3 (Consultations).

7. The Committee shall meet at least once a year, unless otherwise agreed by the
Parties. Meetings may be held through any means, as mutually determined by the Parties.

By mutual agreement, ad hoc working groups may be established if necessary.

8. The terms of reference of the Committee shall be determined on its first meeting.

Chapter 8
Trade Remedies
Part I
General Trade Remedies
Article 8.1: Anti-Dumping Measures

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article VI of GATT 1994 and the
WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of GATT 1994 with regard to the
application of antidumping duties, or any amendments or provisions that supplement or
replace them.

2. No provision of this Agreement, including the provisions of Chapter 14 (Dispute
Settlement) shall be construed as imposing any rights or obligations on the Parties with
respect to anti-dumping measures.

Article 8.2: Countervailing Measures

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations regarding countervailing measures*
under Article VI of GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing
Measures, or any amendments or provisions that supplement or replace them.

2. No provision of this Agreement, including the provisions of Chapter 14 (Dispute
Settlement) shall be construed as imposing any rights or obligations on the Parties with
respect to countervailing measures.

Article 8.3: Global Safeguards

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and
the WTO Agreement on Safeguards and any other relevant provisions in the WTO
Agreement, or any amendments or provisions that supplement or replace them.

2. Except for the circumstance specified in Article 8.6.4, no provision of this
Agreement, including the provisions of Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) shall be construed
as imposing any rights or obligations on the Parties with respect to global safeguard
measures.

“ For greater certainty, countervailing measures and subsidies have the same meaning as defined in the WTO
Agreement.

PART II
Bilateral Safeguards
Article 8.4: Definitions
For the purposes of this Part:

domestic industry means with respect to an imported good, the producers as a whole of
the like or directly competitive good or those producers whose collective production of the
like or directly competitive good constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic
production of such good;

preferential tariff rate means the rate of customs duty for an imported good pursuant to
Annex 3.4;

provisional measure means a provisional safeguard measure described in Article 8.8;
safeguard measure means a transitional safeguard measure described in Article 8.5;

serious injury means a significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic
industry;

threat of serious injury means serious injury that, on the basis of facts and not merely on
allegation, conjecture or remote possibility, is clearly imminent; and

transition period means the five (5) year period beginning on the date of entry into force
of this Agreement, except in the case of a product where the liberalisation process occurs
over a longer period of time, the transition period shall be equal to the period in which such
a product reaches zero tariff according to the Tariff Schedule as specified in Annex 3.4.

Article 8.5: Application of a Transitional Safeguard Measure

If, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty pursuant to this
Agreement, an originating good of a Party is being imported into the other Party’s territory
in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic production, and under
such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to a domestic industry
producing a like or directly competitive good, the other Party may, to the minimum extent
necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and facilitate adjustment, apply a safeguard
measure, consisting of:

(a) the suspension of the further reduction of any rate of customs duty provided
for under this Agreement on the good from the date on which the action to
apply the safeguard measure is taken; or

(b) an increase of the rate of customs duty on the good to a level not to exceed
the lesser of:

(1) the most-favoured-nation (MFN) applied rate of customs duty in
effect on the date on which the action to apply the safeguard measure
is taken; or

(ii) =the MFN applied rate of customs duty in effect on the day
immediately preceding the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 8.6: Scope and Duration of Transitional Safeguard Measures

1. A Party shall apply a safeguard measure only for such period of time as may be
necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment. A Party may
apply a safeguard measure for an initial period of no longer than two (2) years. The period
of a safeguard measure may be extended by up to one (1) year provided that the conditions
of this Chapter are met and that the safeguard measure continues to be applied to the
minimum extent necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and that there is evidence
that the industry is adjusting. The total period of a safeguard measure, including any
extensions thereof, shall not exceed three (3) years. Regardless of its duration or whether it
has been subject to extension, a safeguard measure on a good shall terminate at the end of
the transition period for such good. No new safeguard measure may be applied to a good
after that date.

2. In order to facilitate adjustment in a situation where the proposed duration of a
safeguard measure is over one (1) year, the Party applying the measure shall progressively
liberalise it at regular intervals during the application of the measure, including at the time
of any extension.

3. No safeguard measure shall be applied again to the import of a particular originating
good which has been subject to such a safeguard measure, for a period of time equal to the
duration of the previous safeguard measure or one (1) year, whichever is longer.

4. A Party shall not apply a safeguard or provisional measure on a good that is subject
to a measure that the Party has applied pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the
WTO Agreement on Safeguards.

5. On the termination of a safeguard measure, the Party that applied the measure shall
apply the rate of customs duty set out in its Tariff Schedule as specified in Annex 3.4
(Elimination of Customs Duties) on the date of termination as if the safeguard measure had
never been applied.

Article 8.7: Investigation

1. A Party shall apply or extend a safeguard measure only following an investigation
by the Party’s competent authorities to examine the effect of increased imports of an
originating good of the other Party on the domestic industry, as reflected in changes in such
relevant economic variables as production, productivity, levels of sales, utilisation of
capacity, inventories, market share, exports, wages, employment, domestic prices, profits
and investment, none of which is necessarily decisive. When factors other than increased
imports of an originating good of the other Party resulting from the reduction or elimination

of a customs duty pursuant to this Agreement are simultaneously causing injury to the
domestic industry, such injury shall not be attributed to such increased imports.

2. An investigation under paragraph 1 shall only take place in accordance with
Article 3 and 4.2 (c) of the WTO Agreement on Safeguards; and to this end Article 3 and
4.2 (c) are incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 8.8: Provisional Measures

1. In highly unusual and critical circumstances where delay would cause injury which
would be difficult to repair, a Party may apply a provisional safeguard measure pursuant to
a preliminary determination that there is clear evidence that increased imports of an
originating good of the other Party as a result of the reduction or elimination of a duty
pursuant to this Agreement have caused or are threatening to cause serious injury. The
duration of such a provisional measure shall not exceed one hundred and fifty (150) days,
during which period the pertinent requirements of Articles 8.5, 8.6, and 8.7 shall be met.
The duration of any such provisional measure shall be counted as part of the total period
referred to in Article 8.6.1. Any additional customs duties collected as a result of such a
provisional measure shall be promptly refunded if the subsequent investigation referred to
in Article 8.7 does not determine that increased imports of an originating good of the other
Party have caused or threatened to cause serious injury to a domestic industry. In such a
case, the Party that applied the measure shall apply the rate of customs duty set out in its
Tariff Schedule as specified in Annex 3.4 as if the provisional measure had never applied.

2. In determining whether such highly unusual and critical circumstances exist, a Party
shall have regard to the rate of increase of imports of an originating good of the other Party,
both in absolute and relative terms, and the overall level of the Party’s imports of the good
from the other Party as a share of total imports of the good, as a result of the reduction or
elimination of a duty on the good pursuant to this Agreement.

Article 8.9: Notification and Consultation
1. A Party shall promptly notify the other Party, in writing, on:
(a) initiating an investigation under Article 8.7;
(b) making a finding of serious injury or threat thereof caused by increased
imports of an originating good of the other Party as a result of the reduction

or elimination of a customs duty on the good pursuant to this Agreement;

(c) taking a decision to apply or extend a safeguard measure, or to apply a
provisional measure; and

(d) taking a decision to progressively liberalise a safeguard measure previously
applied.

2. A Party shall provide to the other Party a copy of the public version of the report of
its competent authorities required under Article 8.7 immediately as it is available.

3. In making a notification pursuant to paragraph 1, the Party applying or extending a
safeguard measure shall also provide evidence of serious injury or threat thereof caused by
increased imports of an originating good of the other Party as a result of the reduction or
elimination of a customs duty pursuant to this Agreement, a precise description of the good
involved, the details of the proposed measure including as appropriate the grounds for not
selecting the measure described in Article 8.5 (a), the date of introduction, duration, and
timetable for progressive liberalisation of the measure, if such timetable is applicable. In
the case of an extension of a measure, evidence that the domestic industry concerned is
adjusting shall also be provided. Upon request, the Party applying or extending a safeguard
measure shall provide additional information as the other Party may consider necessary.

4. A Party proposing to apply or extend a safeguard measure shall provide adequate
opportunity for prior consultations with the other Party, with a view to, inter alia,
reviewing the information provided under paragraph 3, exchanging views on the measure
and reaching an agreement on compensation as set forth in Article 8.10.

5. Where a Party applies a provisional measure referred to in Article 8.8, on request of
the other Party, consultations shall be initiated immediately after such application.

6. The provisions on notification in this Chapter shall not require a Party to disclose
confidential information the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement or
otherwise be contrary to the public interest or would prejudice the legitimate commercial
interests of particular juridical persons, public or private.

7. The Parties shall provide an English translation of notifications under this Article
and any other communications between parties.

Article 8.10: Compensation

1. A Party applying a safeguard measure shall, in consultation with the other Party,
provide to the other Party mutually agreed trade liberalising compensation in the form of
substantially equivalent concessions. Such consultations shall begin within thirty (30) days
of the application of the safeguard measure.

2. If the Parties are unable to reach agreement on compensation within thirty (30) days
after the consultations commence, the exporting Party shall be free to suspend the
application of substantially equivalent concessions to the trade of the Party applying the
safeguard measure.

3. The right of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall not be exercised for the first
year that a safeguard measure is in effect, provided that the safeguard measure has been
taken as a result of an absolute increase in imports and that such a measure conforms to the
provisions of this Chapter.

4. A Party shall notify the other Party in writing at least thirty (30) days before
suspending concessions under paragraph 2.

5. The obligation to provide compensation under paragraph | and the right to suspend
substantially equivalent concessions under paragraph 2 shall terminate on the date of the
termination of the safeguard measure.

Chapter 9
Trade in Services
Article 9.1: Definitions
For the purpose of this Chapter:

a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means any service which is
supplied neither on a commercial basis, nor in competition with one or more service
suppliers;

aircraft repair and maintenance services means such activities when undertaken on an
aircraft or a part thereof while it is withdrawn from service and do not include so-called line
maintenance;

airport operation services means passenger air terminal services and ground services on
air fields, including runway operating services, on a fee or contract basis covered under
CPC 7461, excluding airport security services and services covered in ground-handling
Services;

commercial presence means any type of business or professional establishment, including,
inter alia, through the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical person, as well
as branches or representative offices within the territory of a Party for the purpose of
supplying a service;

computer reservation system services means services provided by computerised systems
that contain information about air carrier’s schedules, availability, fares, and fare rules,
through which reservations can be made or tickets may be issued (part of CPC 7523);

juridical person means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised under
applicable law, whether for profit, including governmentally-owned, including any

corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship or association;

measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,
procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other form;

measures adopted or maintained by a Party means measures adopted or maintained by:
(a) central, regional, or local governments and authorities; and

(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central,
regional, or local governments or authorities;

natural person of a Party means a natural person who resides in the territory of a Party
and who under the law of that Party is a national of that Party;

selling and marketing of air transport services has the same meaning as such term is
defined in paragraph 6 (b) of GATS Annex on Air Transport Services, except that the term
marketing shall be limited to market research, advertising and distribution;

service supplier means any juridical or natural person that seeks to supply or supplies a
Service;

services means any Service in any sector except services supplied in the exercise of
governmental authority;

specialty air services means any non-transportation air services, such as_ aerial
fire-fighting, sightseeing, spraying, surveying, mapping, photography, parachute jumping,
glider towing, and helicopter-lift for logging and construction, and other airborne

agricultural, industrial, and inspection services;

state enterprise means a juridical person that is owned, or controlled through ownership
interests by a Party; and

trade in services means the supply of a service:
(a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party (mode 1);

(b) in the territory of a Party by a person of that Party to a person of the other
Party (mode 2);

(c) by a service supplier of a Party, through commercial presence in the territory
of the other Party (mode 3); and

(d) by a service supplier of a Party through presence of natural persons in the
territory of the other Party (mode 4).

Article 9.2: Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party affecting
trade in services by a service supplier of the other Party, including those related to:

(a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale and delivery of a service;
(b) the purchase or use of, or payment for, a service;

(c) the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a service, services
which are required by the Parties to be offered to the public generally; and

(d) the presence in its territory of a service supplier of the other Party.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to:
(a) financial services as defined in Article 10.1 (Definitions);
(b) government procurement;

(c) subsidies or grants provided by a Party or a state enterprise, including
government-supported loans, guarantees, and insurance;

(d) air services, including domestic and international air transportation services,
whether scheduled or non-scheduled, and related services, other than:

(1) aircraft repair and maintenance services;

(11) the selling and marketing of air transport services;
(111) | computer reservation system (CRS) services;

(iv) specialty air services;

(v) airport operation services; and

(vi) ground handling services; and

(e) measures affecting natural persons seeking access to the employment market
of a Party, or measures regarding citizenship, residence or employment on a
permanent basis.

3. This Chapter shall not prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the entry
of natural persons into, or their temporary stay in, its territory, including those measures
necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly movement of natural persons
across, its borders, provided that such measures are not applied in such a manner as to
nullify or impair the benefits accruing to a Party under the terms of a specific commitment”.

Article 9.3: Market Access°

1. With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified in Article 9.1,
each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions agreed and
specified in its Schedule referred to in Article 9.6.

> The sole fact of requiring a visa shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing benefits under a specific
commitment.

° Nothing in this Article should be interpreted to impede a Party to adopt or maintain non-discriminatory
quantitative restrictions related to paragraphs 2 (a) and 2 (e).

2. In sectors where market access commitments are undertaken, the measures which a
Party shall not maintain or adopt, unless otherwise specified in its Schedule referred to in
Article 9.6, are defined as:

(a) limitations on the number of services suppliers whether in the form of
numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the
requirements of an economic needs test;

(b) limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of
numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(c) limitations on the total number of service operations or on the total quantity
of service output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the
form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;’

(d) limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a
particular service sector or that a service supplier may employ and who are
necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific service in the
form of numerical quotas or a requirement of an economic needs test;

(e) measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entities or joint
ventures through which a service supplier of the other Party may supply a
service; and

(f) limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or
aggregate foreign investment.

Article 9.4: National Treatment

1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule referred to in Article 9.6, and subject to any
conditions and qualifications set out therein, each Party shall accord to services and service
suppliers of the other Party, in respect of all measures affecting the supply of services,
treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own like services and service
suppliers.®

2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to services and
service suppliers of the other Party, either formally identical treatment or formally different
treatment to that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.

3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less
favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services or service
suppliers of the Party compared to like services or service suppliers of the other Party.

’ Paragraph 2(c) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of services.

* Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require any Party to compensate
for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of the relevant services
or service suppliers.

Article 9.5: Additional Commitment

Where a Party undertakes specific commitments on measures affecting trade in
services not subject to scheduling under Articles 9.3 and 9.4, such commitments are
inscribed in its Schedule as additional commitments.

Article 9.6: Schedule of Specific Commitments

1. The specific commitments undertaken by each Party under Articles 9.3 and 9.4 are
set out in the Schedule included in Annex 9.6. With respect to sectors where such
commitments are undertaken, each Schedule shall specify:

(a) terms, limitations and conditions on market access;
(b) conditions and qualifications on national treatment;
(c) undertakings relating to additional commitments; and

(d) — where appropriate, the time-frame for implementation of such commitments
and the date of entry into force of such commitments.

2. Measures inconsistent with both Articles 9.3 and 9.4 are inscribed in the column
relating to Article 9.3. In this case, the inscription will be considered to provide a condition
or qualification to Article 9.4 as well.

Article 9.7: Modification of Schedules

Any modification or withdrawal of specific commitments on trade in services shall
be made in accordance with of Article 16.2 (Amendments). In the negotiations for such
modification or withdrawal, the Parties shall enter into negotiations with a view to reaching
an agreement on any necessary compensatory adjustment. In such negotiations and
agreements, the Parties shall maintain a general level of mutually advantageous
commitments not less favourable to trade than that provided for in their Schedules in Annex
9.6 prior to such negotiations.

Article 9.8: Domestic Regulation

1. In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Party shall ensure that
all measures of general application affecting trade in services are administered in a
reasonable, objective and impartial manner.

2. Each Party shall maintain or institute, as soon as practicable, judicial, arbitral or
administrative tribunals or procedures which provide, at the request of an affected service
supplier, for the prompt review of and, where justified, appropriate remedies for,
administrative decisions affecting trade in services. Where such procedures are not
independent of the agency entrusted with the administrative decision concerned, the Party
shall ensure that the procedures in fact provide for an objective and impartial review.

3. With a view to ensuring that measures relating to qualification requirements and
procedures, technical standards, and licensing requirements do not constitute unnecessary
barriers to trade in services, including that such measures are, inter alia:

(a) based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and the
ability to supply the service;
(b) not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service; and
(c) in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves a restriction on the
supply of the service.
4. Where a Party maintains measures relating to qualification requirements and

procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements, the Party shall:

(a) make publicly available:

(1) information on requirements and procedures to obtain, renew or
retain any licences or professional qualifications; and

(11) | information on technical standards;

(b) where any form of authorisation is required for the supply of a service,
ensure that it will:

(1) within a reasonable period of time after the submission of an
application deemed complete under its domestic laws and
regulations, consider the application and make a decision as to
whether or not to grant the relevant authorisation;

(141) | promptly inform the applicant of the decision whether or not to grant
the relevant authorisation;

(111) upon the request of the applicant, provide without undue delay,
information concerning the status of the application; and

(iv) where practicable, upon the written request of an unsuccessful
applicant, provide written reasons for a decision not to grant the
relevant authorisation; and

(c) provide for adequate procedures to verify the competency of professionals of
the other Party.
5. Notwithstanding subparagraph (b) of the definition of measures adopted or

maintained by a Party in Article 9.1, paragraphs | to 3 shall not apply where the relevant
measures are the responsibility of non-governmental bodies. However, each Party shall
encourage such non-governmental bodies to comply with the requirements of paragraphs |

to 3.

6. If the results of the negotiations related to Article VI.4 of GATS (or the results of
any similar negotiations undertaken in other multilateral fora in which both Parties
participate) enter into effect, this Article shall be amended, as appropriate, after
consultations between the Parties, to bring those results into effect under this Agreement.
The Parties agree to coordinate on such negotiations as appropriate.

Article 9.9: Recognition

1. Where a Party recognises, autonomously or by agreement or arrangement, the
education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certifications granted in
the territory of a non-Party, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require the Party
to accord such recognition to the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or
licenses or certifications granted in the territory of the other Party.

2. A Party shall not accord recognition in a manner which would constitute a means of

discrimination between countries in the application of its standards or criteria for the
authorisation, licensing, or certification of services suppliers, or a disguised restriction on
trade in services.

Article 9.10: Emergency Safeguard Measures

The Parties take note of the multilateral negotiations pursuant to Article X of GATS
on the question of emergency safeguard measures. Upon the conclusion of such multilateral
negotiations, the Parties shall conduct a review for the purpose of discussing appropriate
amendments to this Agreement so as to incorporate the results of such multilateral
negotiations.

Article 9.11: Denial of Benefits
Subject to prior notification, a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to:

(a) service suppliers of the other Party where the service is being supplied by a
juridical person that is owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party and
the juridical person has no substantial business activities in the territory of
the other Party; or

(b) service suppliers of the other Party where the service is being supplied by a
juridical person that is owned or controlled by persons of the denying Party
and the juridical person has no substantial business activities in the territory
of the other Party.

Article 9.12: Review

Three (3) years after the entry into force of this Agreement or upon request of a
Party and in pursuit of the objectives and purposes of this Chapter, the Commission may
review this Chapter, taking into account the developments and regulations on trade in
services of the Parties as well as the progress made at the WTO, including discussions
regarding Emergency Safeguard Measures and other specialised forums, where both Parties
are members.

Article 9.13: Committee on Trade in Services

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade in Services (hereinafter referred
to as “the Committee’’).

2. The functions of the Committee shall be:
(a) reviewing the implementation and operation of this Chapter;
(b) exchanging information on domestic laws and regulations;
(c) discussing any issues related to this Chapter as may be agreed upon;
(d) reporting the findings of the Committee to the Commission; and
(e) carrying out other functions which may be delegated by the Commission

pursuant to Article 13.1.4 (Free Trade Commission).

Chapter 10
Trade in Financial Services
Article 10.1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
a financial service supplier means any natural or juridical person that seeks to supply or
supplies financial services but the term financial service supplier does not include a public

entity;

commercial presence means any type of business or professional establishment, including
through:

(a) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical person; or

(b) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office, within the
territory of a Party for the purpose of supplying a financial service;

financial service means any service of a financial nature, offered by a financial service
supplier of a Party. Financial services comprise the following activities:

Insurance and Insurance-related Services
(a) direct insurance (including co-insurance):
(i) life
(11) non-life
(b) reinsurance and retrocession;
(c) insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency;

(d) services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, actuarial, risk
assessment and claim settlement services.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
(e) acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public;

(f) lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage credit, factoring
and financing of commercial transaction;

(g) financial leasing;

(h) all payment and money transmission services, including credit, charge and
debit cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts;

(1) guarantees and commitments;

(j) trading for own account or for account of customers, whether on an
exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, the following:

(1) money market instruments (including cheques, bills, certificates of
deposits);

(11) foreign exchange;
(111) derivative products including, but not limited to, futures and options;

(iv) | exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including products such
as swaps, forward rate agreements;

(v) transferable securities;
(vi) other negotiable instruments and financial assets, including bullion;

(k) participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and
placement as agent (whether publicly or privately) and provision of services
related to such issues;

(1) money broking;

(m) asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all forms of
collective investment management, pension fund management, custodial,
depository and trust services;

(n) settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities,
derivative products, and other negotiable instruments;

(0) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing
and related software by suppliers of other financial services; and

(p) advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary financial services on all the
activities listed in subparagraphs (e) through (0), including credit reference
and analysis, investment and portfolio research and advice, advice on
acquisitions and on corporate restructuring and strategy.

juridical person means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised under
applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or
governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole
proprietorship or association;

juridical person of a Party means a juridical person which is either:
(a) constituted or otherwise organised under the law of that Party, and is
engaged in substantive business operations in financial services in the

territory of that Party; or

(b) in the case of supply of a financial service through commercial presence in
the territory of the other Party, is owned or controlled by:

(i) natural persons of that Party; or
(11) juridical persons of that Party identified under subparagraph (a);
additionally, in the case of Thailand, such juridical person is:

(c) owned by persons of a Party if more than 50 per cent of the equity interest
in it is beneficially owned by persons of that Party;

(d) controlled by persons of a Party if such persons have the power to name a
majority of its directors or otherwise to legally direct its actions; and

(e) affiliated with another person when it controls, or is controlled by, that
other person; or when it and the other person are both controlled by the
same person;

measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,
procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other form;

measures adopted or maintained by a Party means measures taken by:
(a) central, regional or local governments and authorities; and

(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central,
regional or local governments or authorities; and

natural person means a national of Chile or of Thailand according to their respective
legislation;

public entity means:

(a) a government, a central bank or a monetary authority of a Party, or an
entity owned or controlled by a Party, that is principally engaged in
carrying out governmental functions or activities for governmental
purposes, not including an entity principally engaged in supplying financial
services on commercial terms; or

(b)

a private entity performing functions normally performed by a central bank
or monetary authority when exercising those functions.

Article 10.2: Scope

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by the Parties affecting
trade in financial services.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, trade in financial services is defined as the supply
of a financial service through the following modes:

(a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party (mode 1);
(b) in the territory of a Party to the financial service consumer of the other
Party (mode 2);
(c) by a financial service supplier of a Party through commercial presence in
the territory of the other Party (mode 3); and
(d) by a financial service supplier of a Party through presence of natural
persons in the territory of the other Party (mode 4).
3. This Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting:
(a) activities conducted by a central bank or monetary authority or by any
other public entity in pursuit of monetary or exchange rate policies;
(b) activities forming part of a statutory system of social security or public
retirement plans; and
(c) other activities conducted by a public entity for the account or with the
guarantee or using the financial resources of the Government.
4. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose any

obligation with respect to:

(a)
(b)

government procurement; or

subsidies or grants including government-supported loans, guarantees, and
insurance, provided by a Party or to any conditions attached to the receipt
of such subsidies or grants, whether or not such subsidies or grants are
offered exclusively to domestic services, service consumers or service
suppliers.

Article 10.3: Market Access

1. With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified in Article
10.2, each Party shall accord financial services and financial service suppliers of the other
Party treatment no less favourable than that provided for under the terms, limitations and
conditions agreed and specified in its Schedule referred to in Article 10.5.

2. In sectors where market-access commitments are undertaken, the measures which a
Party shall not maintain or adopt either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis
of its entire territory, unless otherwise specified in its Schedule, are defined as:

(a) limitations on the number of financial services suppliers whether in the
form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the
requirements of an economic needs test;

(b) limitations on the total value of financial service transactions or assets in
the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(c) limitations on the total number of financial service operations or on the
total quantity of service output expressed in terms of designated numerical
units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test!®;

(d) limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed in
a particular financial service sector or that a financial service supplier may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a
specific financial service in the form of numerical quotas or a requirement
of an economic needs test;

(e) measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entities or joint
ventures through which a financial service supplier of the other Party may
supply a financial service; and

(f) limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or
aggregate foreign investment.

Article 10.4: National Treatment
1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule referred to in Article 10.5, and subject to the

conditions and qualifications set out therein, each Party shall accord to financial services
and financial service suppliers of the other Party, in respect of all measures affecting the

'® Subparagraph 2 (c) does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of services.

supply of financial services, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own like
financial services and financial service suppliers.’

2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to financial services
and financial service suppliers of the other Party, either formally identical treatment or
formally different treatment to that it accords to its own like financial services and financial
service suppliers.

3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less
favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of financial services or
financial service suppliers of a Party compared to like financial services or financial service
suppliers of the other Party.

Article 10.5: Schedule of Specific Commitments
1. The specific commitment undertaken by each Party under Articles 10.3 and 10.4 are

set out in the Schedule included in Annex II. With respect to sectors where such
commitments are undertaken, each Schedule specifies:

(a) terms, limitations and conditions on market access; and
(b) conditions and qualifications on national treatment.
2. Measures inconsistent with both Articles 10.3 and 10.4 are inscribed in the column

relating to Article 10.3. In this case, the inscription is considered to provide a condition or
qualification to Article 10.4 as well.

Article 10.6: Regulatory Transparency

1. Each Party shall ensure that measures of general application adopted or maintained
by a Party are promptly published or otherwise made publicly available. !

2. Each Party shall, to the extent practicable, provide in advance to interested persons
any measure of general application that the Party proposes to adopt, in order to allow an
opportunity for such persons to comment on the measure.

3. Each Party's appropriate financial regulatory authority shall make available to
interested persons its requirements for completing applications relating to the supply of
financial services.

'7 Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require either Party to
compensate for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of the relevant
services or service suppliers.

'S For greater certainty, the Parties agree that such information may be published in each Party’s chosen
language.

4. On the request of an applicant in writing, the appropriate financial regulatory
authority shall inform the applicant of the status of its application. If such authority requires
additional information from the applicant, it shall notify the applicant without undue delay.

5. Each Party shall make its best endeavour to implement and apply in its territory
internationally agreed standards for regulation and supervision in the financial services
sector.

Article 10.7: Data Processing in the Financial Services Sector

1. In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Party shall permit a
financial service supplier of the other Party to transfer information in electronic or other
forms, into and out of its territory, for data processing where such processing is required in
the ordinary course of business of such financial service supplier.

2. Nothing in paragraph 1 shall:

(a) restrict the right of a Party to protect personal data, personal privacy and
the confidentiality of individual records and accounts including in
accordance with its domestic laws and regulations so long as such right
shall not be used as a means of avoiding the Party’s commitments or
obligations under this Agreement;

(b) prevent a regulator of a Party for regulatory or prudential reasons from
requiring a financial service supplier in its territory to comply with
domestic regulation in relation to data management and storage, and
system maintenance, as well as to retain within its territory copies of
records; or

(c) be construed to require a Party to allow the cross-border supply or the
consumption abroad of services in relation to which it has not made
specific commitments including to allow non-resident suppliers of financial
services to supply, as a principal, through an intermediary or as an
intermediary, the provision and transfer of financial information and
financial data processing as referred to in subparagraph (0) of Article 10.1.

Article 10.8: Confidential Information
Nothing in this Chapter shall:

(a) require any of the Parties to provide confidential information, the
disclosure of which would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be
contrary to the public interest, or which would prejudice legitimate
commercial interests of particular juridical persons, whether public or
private; and

(b) be construed to require a Party to disclose information relating to the
financial affairs and accounts of individual customers, or any confidential
or proprietary information in the possession of public entities.

Article 10.9: Prudential Carve-out

Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining
measures for prudential reasons, including for the protection of investors, depositors, policy
holders or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed by a financial services supplier, or to
ensure the integrity, soundness and stability of the financial system. Where such measures
do not conform with the provisions of this Chapter, they shall not be used as a means of
avoiding the Party’s commitments or obligations under this Chapter.

Article 10.10: Recognition

1. A Party may recognise prudential measures of the other Party in determining how
the Party’s measures relating to financial services shall be applied. Such recognition, which
may be achieved through harmonisation or otherwise, may be based upon an agreement or
arrangement or may be accorded autonomously.

2. A Party that is a party to an agreement or arrangement with a third party such as
those referred to in paragraph 1, whether future or existing, shall afford adequate
opportunity for the other Party to negotiate its accession to such agreement or arrangement,
or to negotiate comparable ones with it, under circumstances in which there would be
equivalent regulation, oversight, implementation of such regulation, and, if appropriate,
procedures concerning the sharing of information between the Parties to the agreement or
arrangement. Where a Party accords recognition autonomously, it shall afford adequate
opportunity for the other Party to demonstrate that such circumstances exist.

Article 10.11: Committee on Financial Services

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Financial Services (hereinafter referred
to as “the Committee”). The Committee shall be composed of representatives of the Parties.
The principal representative of each Party shall be an official of the Party's Ministry of
Finance or authorities designated by the Ministry of Finance.

2. The functions of the Committee shall include supervising the implementation of this
Chapter and considering issues regarding financial services that are referred to it by a Party.

3. The Committee shall meet upon request of a Party on a date and with an agenda
agreed in advance by both Parties.

Article 10.12: Consultations
1. A Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding any matter arising

under this Chapter. The other Party shall give sympathetic consideration to the request. The
Parties shall report the results of their consultations to the Committee.

2. Consultations under this Article shall include officials of the authorities specified in
Annex I.

3. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require financial authorities
participating in consultations to disclose information or take any action that would interfere
with individual regulatory, supervisory, administrative or enforcement matters.

4. Where a financial authority of a Party requires information for supervisory purposes
concerning a financial service supplier in the other Party’s territory, such financial authority
may approach the competent financial authority in the other Party’s territory to seek the
information. The provision of such information may be subject to the terms, conditions and
limitations contained in the other Party’s relevant law or to the requirement of a prior
agreement or arrangement between the respective financial authorities.

Article 10.13: Specific Provisions on Dispute Settlement

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, any disputes under this Chapter shall
be settled in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement).

2. Consultations held under Article 10.12 shall be deemed to constitute the
consultations referred to in Article 14.3 (Consultations), unless the Parties otherwise agree.
If the matter has not been resolved within sixty (60) days after the starting date of the
consultations under Article 10.12 or ninety (90) days after the receipt of the request for
consultations under Article 10.12.1, whichever is earlier, the complaining Party may
request in writing the establishment of an arbitral panel. The Parties shall report the results
of their consultations directly to the Commission.

3. Arbitrators of arbitral panels constituted for disputes arising under this Chapter shall
meet the requirements set out in Article 14.7 (Composition of Arbitral Panels) and shall
also have expertise or experience in financial services law or practice, which may include
the regulation of financial institutions.

4. Consistent with Article 14.14 (Non-Implementation -— Compensation and
Suspension of Concessions or other Obligations), in any dispute where an arbitral panel
finds a measure to be inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement and the measure
affects:

(a) only the financial services sector, the complaining Party may suspend
benefits only in the financial services sector;

(b) the financial services sector and any other sector, the complaining Party
may suspend benefits in the financial services sector to the same extent that
such measure have an effect on the Party’s financial services sector; or

(c) only a sector other than the financial services sector, the complaining Party
may not suspend benefits in the financial services sector.

Chapter 11
Economic Cooperation
Article 11.1: General Objectives

1. The Parties agree to establish a framework for collaborative activities as a
means to expand and enhance the benefits of this Agreement for building a strategic
economic partnership.

2. The Parties will establish close cooperation aimed, inter alia, at:

(a) strengthening and building on existing cooperative relationships
between the Parties, including a focus on promoting economic and
social development, fostering innovation and encouraging research
and development;

(b) creating new opportunities for trade and investment, promoting
competitiveness and innovation;

(c) supporting the important role of the private sector in promoting and
building strategic alliances to encourage mutual economic growth
and development;

(d) encouraging the presence of the Parties and their goods and services
in their respective markets of Asia Pacific and Latin America;

(e) reinforce and expand cooperation, collaboration and mutual
exchange in the cultural and educational areas; and

(f) increasing the level of and deepening cooperation activities between
the Parties in areas of mutual interest.

Article 11.2: Scope

1. The Parties affirm the importance of all forms of cooperation, including, but
not limited to, the fields of cooperation enlisted in Article 11.3 and any other fields
that the Parties agree or include.

2. Cooperation between the Parties should contribute to achieving the
objectives of this Agreement through the identification and development of
innovative cooperation programmes capable of providing added value to their
relationships.

3. Cooperative activities will be agreed between the Parties and may include,
though not limited to, those enlisted in Article 11.4

4. Cooperation between the Parties under this Chapter will complement the
cooperation and cooperative activities between the Parties set out in other Chapters
of this Agreement.

Article 11.3:

Fields of Cooperation

Fields of cooperation and capacity building under this Chapter may include,

among others:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

(f)
(g)
(h)

(j)

(k)
(1)

(m)
(n)
(0)
(p)
(q)

Article 11.4:

Trade and Investment Promotion;

Science, Innovation, Research and Development;
Agriculture, Aquaculture and Fishery, Food Industry and Forestry;
Mining;

Energy;

Small and Medium-sized Enterprises;

Tourism;

Education, and Human Capital Development;
Community Development and Cultural Cooperation;
Trade-related Gender Issues;

Logistics and International Transportation;
Environment;

Labour Issues;

Government Procurement;

Information and Communication Technology (ICT);
E-commerce; and

Geographical Indications.

Activities of Cooperation

1. Areas and forms of cooperation under this Chapter shall be set forth in the
implementing arrangements consistent with the objectives set in Article 11.1.

2. Parties

will encourage and facilitate, as mutually agreed by both Parties, the

following activities, including, but not limited to:

(a)
(b)

exchange of people, information, documentation, experiences;

cooperation in regional and multilateral fora;

(c) direct cooperative activities;
(d) technical assistance;

(e) dialogues, conferences, seminars and training programmes with
experts; and

(f) any other activity the Cooperation Committee might define.

Article 11.5: Environmental Issues

1. Recognising the importance of strengthening capacity to promote
sustainable development with their three (3) interdependent and mutually
reinforcing components: economic growth, social development and environmental
protection, the Parties agree to cooperate in the field of environment.

2. The Parties agree that it is inappropriate to set or use their environmental
laws, regulations, policies and practices for trade protectionist purposes; as well as
it is inappropriate to relax, or fail to enforce or administer, their environmental laws

and regulations to encourage trade and investment.

3. Each Party shall endeavour to promote public awareness of its
environmental laws, regulations, policies and practices domestically.

4. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in the field of the environment as
mutually agreed by both Parties. The aim of cooperation will be the prevention
and/or reduction of pollution and degradation of natural resources and ecosystems,
and rational use of the latter; through developing and endorsing special programmes
and projects dealing, inter alia, with the transfer of knowledge and technology.
5. Cooperation on environment may include:

(a) climate change;

(b) biodiversity and conservation of natural resources;

(c) management of hazardous chemicals;

(d) air quality;

(e) water management;

(f) waste management;

(g) | marine and coastal ecological conservation and pollution control;

(h) strategic environmental impact assessment;

(1) improvement of environmental awareness, including environmental
education and public participation; and

(j) green technology.

6. New areas of cooperation may be developed through existing agreements
and through appropriate implementing arrangements.

7. In order to facilitate communication for purposes of this Article, each Party
will designate a contact point no later than six (6) months from the date of entry
into force of this Agreement. Each Party will notify the other Party promptly of any
change of contact point.

Article 11.6: Labour Issues

1. In accordance with Article 11.3 the Parties hereby reaffirm their
commitment to establish cooperation on labour.

2. Parties will cooperate on labour and employment-related matters in the areas
of mutual interest and benefit, which may include, but not limited to promotion of
decent work, labour policies, best practices of the labour systems, the development
and management of human capital for enhanced employability, business excellence
and greater productivity for the benefit of workers and employers.

3. The cooperation will be carried out through mutually agreed activities,
which may include exchanges of information and expertise, and joint organisation
of seminars, workshops and meetings for experts, regulatory authorities and other
persons concerned.

4. The Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage trade or
investment by weakening or reducing the protections afforded in domestic labour
laws.

5. In order to facilitate communication for purposes of this Article, each Party
will designate a contact point no later than six (6) months from the date of entry
into force of this Agreement. Each Party will notify the other Party promptly of any
change of contact point.

Article 11.7: Electronic Commerce

1. Recognising the global nature of electronic commerce, the Parties shall
endeavour to:

(a) work together to assist small and medium enterprises to overcome
obstacles encountered in its use;

(b) exchange information and share experiences on regulations, policies,
enforcement and compliance regarding electronic commerce,
including:

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(1) personal data protection;

(11) | online consumer protection including means for consumer
redress and building consumer confidence;

(111) unsolicited commercial electronic messages;
(iv) security in electronic communications;

(v) authentication; and

(vi) e-government;

participate actively in regional and multilateral fora to promote the
development of electronic commerce;

encourage development by the private sector of methods of self-
regulation that foster electronic commerce, including codes of
conduct, model contracts, guidelines and enforcement mechanisms;

encourage interoperability of electronic authentication and digital
certificates in the business and government sectors, work towards the
mutual recognition of digital certificates at government level, based
on internationally accepted standards, and maintain domestic
legislation for electronic authentication that:

(1) permits parties to electronic transactions to determine the
appropriate authentication technologies and implementation
models for their electronic transactions, without limiting the
recognition of such technologies and implementation models;
and

(11) permits parties to electronic transactions to have the
opportunity to prove in court that their electronic transactions
comply with any legal requirements;

facilitate cross-border electronic transactions and paperless trading:
(1) each Party shall accept the electronic format of trade
administration documents as the legal equivalent of paper

documents except where:

- there is a domestic or international legal requirement
to the contrary; or

- doing so would reduce the effectiveness of the trade
administration process; and

(11) — the Parties shall cooperate bilaterally and in international fora
to enhance acceptance of electronic versions of trade
administration documents;

(g) encourage cooperation in research and training that would enhance
the development of electronic commerce including by sharing best
practices on electronic commerce development;

(h) encourage development of domestic frameworks which are
compatible with evolving international norms and standards;

(1) provide an environment which promotes trust and confidence among
electronic commerce participants;

(j) take appropriate measures and take into account international
standards on personal data protection:

(1) notwithstanding the differences in existing systems for
personal data protection in the territories of the Parties, each
Party shall take such measures as it considers appropriate and
necessary to protect the personal data of users of electronic
commerce; and

(11) in the development of data protection standards, each Party
shall, to the extent possible, take into account international
standards and the criteria of relevant international
organisations; and

(k) provide protection for consumers using electronic commerce that is
at least equivalent to that provided for consumers of other forms of
commerce under their respective laws, regulations, and policies, to
the extent possible and in a manner considered appropriate by each
Party.

2. In order to facilitate communication for purposes of this Article, each Party
will designate a contact point no later than six (6) months from the date of entry
into force of this Agreement. Each Party will notify the other Party promptly of any
change of contact point.

Article 11.8: Government Procurement

1. The Parties recognise the importance of government procurement to their
economies.
2. The Parties shall endeavour to promote transparency, value for money, open

and effective competition, fair dealing, accountability and due process, and non-
discrimination in their government procurement procedures.

3. The Parties will cooperate on government procurement-related matters in the
areas of mutual interest and benefit.

4. The cooperation will be carried out through mutually agreed activities,
which may include the exchange of information on their respective laws and
regulations, policies and practices on government procurement, as well as on any
reforms to their existing government procurement regimes.

5. For the purposes of this Article, the Parties hereby establish a Working
Group on Government Procurement. This Working Group shall report to the
Commission on the outcomes of its discussions.

Article 11.9: Geographical Indications”’

1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its laws and regulations and in
conformity with the WTO TRIPS Agreement, protection of geographical
indications with regard to any goods. Each Party shall accept applications without
the requirement for intercession by a Party on behalf of its persons.

2. The Parties shall cooperate to exchange views on issues relating to
protection of geographical indications, including any strengthening of such
protection.

3. The terms listed in Annex 11.9 are geographical indications of Chile and
Thailand, within the meaning of paragraph 1 of Article 22 of the WTO TRIPS
Agreement”.

4. At the request of a Party, the Commission may decide to add or remove
geographical indications from Annex 11.9.

5. In the case of homonymous geographical indications, each Party shall
determine the practical conditions under which the homonymous indications in
question will be differentiated from each other, subject to respective domestic laws
and regulations of each Party.

Article 11.10: Cooperation Committee

1. For the purpose of this Agreement, the Parties hereby establish the
Cooperation Committee comprising representatives of each Party.

2. The Cooperation Committee shall be coordinated and co-chaired by:

(a) in the case of Chile, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs through the
General Directorate for International Economic Affairs, or its
successor; and

*7 Parties acknowledge that this article does not create an obligation for either Party to amend their
respective laws and regulations, nor does it affect the implementation thereof.

°*S For greater certainty, geographical indications will be recognised and protected in Chile and
Thailand, only to the extent permitted by and in accordance with the terms and conditions set out in
their respective domestic laws and regulations, in a manner that is consistent with the TRIPS
Agreement.

(b) in the case of Thailand, the Ministry of Commerce through the
Department of Trade Negotiations, or its successor.

3. In order to facilitate the communications and ensure the proper functioning
of the Cooperation Committee, the Parties will designate a contact person no later
than nine (9) months following the date of entry into force of this Agreement. Each
Party will notify the other Party promptly of any change of contact point.

4. The Cooperation Committee shall meet at least once a year unless the
Parties otherwise agree. During the first meeting, the Cooperation Committee shall
agree its specific terms of reference.

5. The Cooperation Committee’s functions shall include:

(a) to determine the fields of cooperation and the cooperative activities;

(b) — to oversee the implementation of the strategic collaboration agreed
by the Parties;

(c) to encourage the Parties to undertake cooperation activities under this
Chapter; and

(d) to maintain updated information regarding any cooperation
agreements, arrangements or instruments between the Parties.

6. The Cooperation Committee may agree to establish ad hoc working groups
in accordance with the Cooperation Committee’s terms of reference.

7. The Cooperation Committee may interact, were appropriate, with the
relevant entities to address specific matters.

8. The Cooperation Committee shall report periodically to the Commission the
results of its meetings. Consequently, the Commission may formulate
recommendations regarding cooperation activities under this Chapter in accordance
with the strategic priorities of the Parties.

Article 11.11: Non-application of Dispute Settlement

The dispute settlement procedure provided for in Chapter 14 (Dispute
Settlement) shall not apply to this Chapter, with the exception of Article 11.9.

Article 11.12: Costs of Cooperation

1. The implementation of cooperation under this Chapter shall be subject to the
availability of funds and the applicable laws and regulations of each Party.

2. Costs of cooperation under this Chapter shall be borne by the Parties within
the limits of their own capacities and through their own channels, in an equitable
manner to be mutually agreed by the Parties.

Chapter 12
Transparency
Article 12.1: Definition

For the purposes of this Chapter, administrative ruling of general application
means an administrative ruling or interpretation that applies to all persons and factual
situations that fall generally within its ambit and that establishes a norm of conduct but
does not include:

(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative proceeding that applies
to a particular person, good or service of the other Party in a specific case;
or

(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or practice.
Article 12.2: Contact Points

1. The contact point referred in Annex 12.2 shall facilitate communications between
the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.

2. On the request of the other Party, the contact point shall identify the office or
official responsible for the matter and assist, as necessary, in facilitating communications
with the requesting Party.

Article 12.3: Publication

1. Each Party shall ensure, wherever possible in electronic form, that its laws,
regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application in respect of any
matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published or otherwise made available in
such a manner as to enable interested persons and the other Party to become acquainted
with them.

2. To the extent possible, each Party shall:

(a) publish in advance any such laws, regulations, procedures and
administrative rulings of general application referred to in paragraph 1 that
it proposes to adopt; and

(b) provide interested persons and the other Party a reasonable opportunity to
comment on such proposed measures.

Article 12.4: Notification and Provision of Information

1. To the maximum extent possible, each Party shall notify the other Party of any
proposed or actual measure that the Party considers might materially affect the operation of
this Agreement or otherwise substantially affect the other Party’s interests under this
Agreement.

2. On request of the other Party, a Party shall promptly provide information and
respond to questions pertaining to any actual or proposed measure that the requesting Party
considers might materially affect the operation of this Agreement or otherwise

substantially affect its interests under this Agreement, regardless of whether the requesting
Party has been previously notified of that measure.

3. Any notification, request or information under this Article shall be provided to the
other Party through the relevant contact points.

4. Any notification or information provided under this Article shall be without
prejudice as to whether the measure is consistent with this Agreement.

Article 12.5: Administrative Proceedings

With a view to administering, in a consistent, impartial and reasonable manner, its
measures referred to in Article 12.3, each Party shall ensure that in its administrative
proceedings in which these measures are applied to particular persons, goods or services of
the other Party in specific cases that it:

(a) provides wherever possible, persons of the other Party that are directly
affected by a proceeding reasonable notice, in accordance with its domestic
procedures, when a proceeding is initiated, including a description of the
nature of the proceeding, a statement of the legal authority under which the
proceeding is initiated, and a general description of any issues in
controversy;

(b) affords such persons a reasonable opportunity to present facts and
arguments in support of their positions prior to any final administrative
action, when time, the nature of the proceeding and the public interest
permit; and

(c) follows its procedures in accordance with domestic law.
Article 12.6: Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial, or administrative tribunals or
procedures for the purpose of prompt review and, where warranted, correction of final
administrative actions regarding matters covered by this Agreement. Such tribunals shall
be impartial and independent of the office or authority entrusted with administrative
enforcement and shall not have any substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, in any such tribunals or procedures, the parties to the
proceeding are provided with the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and

(b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record or, where
required by domestic law, the record compiled by the administrative
authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided in its
domestic law, that such decisions shall be implemented by, and shall govern the practice
of, the office or authority with respect to the administrative action that is the subject of the
decision.

Chapter 13

Administration and Institutional Provisions

Article 13.1: Free Trade Commission

1. The Parties hereby establish a Free Trade Commission (hereinafter referred to as
“the Commission’).

2. The Commission shall be composed of relevant government officials of each Party
and shall be co-chaired by:

(a) in the case of Chile, the Director-General of International Economic Affairs
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for Chile or their respective designee; and

(b) in the case of Thailand, the Director-General of the Department of Trade
Negotiations of the Ministry of Commerce for Thailand, or their respective
designee.

3. The Commission shall:

(a) review the general functioning of this Agreement;

(b) review, consider and, as appropriate, decide on specific matters relating to
the operation, application and implementation of this Agreement, including
matters reported by committees or working groups established under this
Agreement;

(c) supervise and coordinate the work of committees, working groups and
contact points established under this Agreement;

(d) provide assistance in order to resolve disputes that may arise regarding the
interpretation, implementation or application of this Agreement; and

(e) take such other action as the Parties may agree.

4. The Commission may:

(a) establish, refer matters and delegate responsibilities to any committee or
working group;

(b) consider and adopt any modifications*” of:

(1) the Schedules attached to Annex 3.4 (Reduction and/or Elimination
of Customs Duties), by accelerating tariff elimination; and

*° The acceptance of any modification by a Party is subject to the completion of any necessary domestic legal
procedures of that Party. Chile shall implement the actions of the Commission through Acuerdos de
Ejecucion, in accordance with Article 54, number 1, second paragraph, of the Constitucién Politica de la
Republica de Chile.

(ii) the rules of origin established in Annex 4.2 (Product Specific Rules);

(111) the Geographical Indications listed in Annex 11.9 (List of
Geographical Indications);

(c) issue interpretations of this Agreement; and

(d) seek the opinion of non-governmental persons or groups on matters
covered by this Agreement.

Article 13.2: Procedures of the Commission

1. The Commission shall convene at least once a year in regular session. The
Commission shall meet alternately in the territory of each Party, unless the Parties
otherwise agree.

2. The Commission shall also meet in special session within thirty (30) days of the
request of a Party, with such sessions to be held in the territory of the other Party or at such
location as may be agreed by the Parties.

3. All decisions of the Commission shall be taken by mutual agreement.

4. The Commission shall establish its rules and procedures at its first meeting.

Chapter 14
Dispute Settlement
Article 14.1: Scope

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the dispute settlement provisions
of this Chapter shall apply with respect to the avoidance or settlement of all disputes
between the Parties regarding the implementation, interpretation or application of this
Agreement, which includes wherever a Party considers that:

(a) a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with its obligations under this
Agreement; or

(b) — the other Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under this
Agreement.

Article 14.2: Choice of Forum

1. Where a dispute regarding any matter arises under this Agreement and under
another free trade agreement to which both Parties are parties or the WTO Agreement, the
complaining Party may select the forum in which to settle the dispute.

2. Once the complaining Party has requested a panel under an agreement referred to in
paragraph 1, the forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of the others.

Article 14.3: Consultations

1. Either Party may request in writing consultations with the other Party concerning
any matter on the implementation, interpretation or application of this Agreement,
including a matter relating to a measure that the other Party proposes to adopt.

2. The requesting Party shall deliver the request to the other Party, setting out the
reasons for the request, including identification of the measure at issue and an indication of
the legal basis for the complaint, and providing sufficient information to enable an
examination of the matter.

3. The Parties shall make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory resolution
through consultations of any matter raised in accordance with this Article.

4. In consultations under this Article, a Party may request the other Party to make
available personnel of its government agencies or other regulatory bodies who have
expertise in the matter subject to consultations.

5. The consultations under this Article shall be confidential and without prejudice to
the rights of either Party in any further proceedings.

Article 14.4: Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation

1. The Parties may at any time agree to good offices, conciliation or mediation. They
may begin and be terminated at any time.

2. Good offices, conciliation or mediation may continue while procedures of an
arbitral panel established in accordance with this Chapter are in progress.

Article 14.5: Referral of Matters to the Commission

1. If the consultations fail to resolve the matter within forty (40) days of the delivery
of a Party’s request for consultations under Article 14.3.2, or twenty (20) days in cases of
urgency including those which concern perishable goods, the complaining Party may refer
the matter to the Commission by delivering written notification to the other Party. The
Commission shall endeavour to resolve the matter.

2. The Commission may:

(a) call on such technical advisers or create such working groups or expert
groups as it deems necessary;

(b) have recourse to good offices, conciliation, mediation or such other dispute
resolution procedures; or

(c) make recommendations;
as may assist the Parties to reach a mutually satisfactory resolution of the dispute.
Article 14.6: Establishment of Arbitral Panels

1. The complaining Party that requested consultations under Article 14.3 may request
in writing the establishment of an arbitral panel, if the Parties fail to resolve the matter
within:

(a) forty-five (45) days after the date of receipt of the request for consultation if
there is no referral to the Commission under Article 14.5;

(b) thirty (30) days of the Commission convening pursuant to Article 14.5, or
fifteen (15) days in cases of urgency, including those which concern
perishable goods; or

(c) sixty (60) days after a Party has delivered a request for consultation under
Article 14.3, or thirty (30) days in cases of urgency, including those which
concern perishable goods, if the Commission has not convened after a
referral under Article 14.5.

2. The establishment of an arbitral panel shall not be requested on any matter relating
to a proposed measure, as referred to in Article 14.3.1.

3. Any request to establish an arbitral panel pursuant to this Article shall identify:
(a) the specific measure at issue;

(b) — the legal basis of the complaint including any provision of this Agreement
alleged to have been breached and any other relevant provisions; and

(c) the factual basis for the complaint.

4. The arbitral panel shall be established and perform its functions in a manner
consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.

5. The date of the establishment of an arbitral panel shall be the date on which the
chair is appointed.

Article 14.7: Composition of Arbitral Panels
1. An arbitral panel shall comprise three panelists.

2. Each Party shall, within forty (40) days after the date of receipt of the request for
the establishment of an arbitral panel, appoint one panelist who may be its national and
propose up to three candidates to serve as the third panelist who shall be the chair of the
arbitral panel. The third panelist shall not be a national of either Party, nor have his or her
usual place of residence in either Party, nor be employed by either Party, nor have dealt
with the dispute in any capacity.

3. The Parties shall agree on and appoint the third panelist within fifty (50) days after
the date of receipt of the request for the establishment of an arbitral panel, taking into
account the candidates proposed pursuant to paragraph 2.

4. If a Party has not appointed a panelist pursuant to paragraph 2 or if the Parties fail
to agree on and appoint the third panelist pursuant to paragraph 3, the panelist or panelists
not yet appointed shall be chosen within seven (7) days by lot from the candidates
proposed pursuant to paragraph 2.

5. All panelists shall:

(a) have expertise or experience in law, international trade or other matters
covered by this Agreement;

(b) be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity, reliability and sound judgment;

(c) be independent of, and not be affiliated with or receive instructions from,
the government of either Party; and

(d) comply with a code of conduct to be agreed by the Parties after the entry
into force of this Agreement.

6. If a panelist appointed under this Article dies, becomes unable to act or resigns, a
successor shall be appointed within twenty (20) days in accordance with the appointment
procedure provided for in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, which shall be applied respectively,
mutatis mutandis. The successor shall have all the powers and duties of the original
panelist. The work of the arbitral panel shall be suspended for a period beginning on the
date the original panelist dies, becomes unable to act or resigns. The work of the arbitral
panel shall resume on the date the successor is appointed.

Article 14.8: Functions of Arbitral Panels
1. An arbitral panel established under Article 14.7:

(a) shall make its report in accordance with this Agreement and applicable rule
of international law;

(b) shall set out, in its report, its findings of facts and law, together with its
reasons therefore; and

(c) may, in addition to its findings of facts and law, include in its report,
recommendations for the Parties to consider in implementing the findings.

2. The report of the arbitral panel shall be final and binding on the Parties.

3. The arbitral panel shall attempt to make its decision, including its report, by
consensus but may also make such decisions by majority vote.

Article 14.9: Terms of Reference of Arbitral Panels

Unless the Parties otherwise agree within twenty (20) days from the date of receipt
of the request for the establishment of the arbitral panel, the terms of reference of the
arbitral panel shall be:

“To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the
matter referred to in the request for the establishment of an arbitral panel
pursuant to Article 14.6, to make findings of facts and law, and
determinations on whether the measure is not in conformity with the
Agreement together with the reasons therefore, and to issue a written
report for the resolution of the dispute. If the Parties agree, the arbitral
panel may make recommendations for resolution of the dispute.”

Article 14.10: Proceedings of Arbitral Panels

1. The arbitral panel shall meet in closed session. The Parties shall be present at the
meetings only when invited by the arbitral panel to appear before it.

2. The deliberations of the arbitral panel and the documents submitted to it shall be
kept confidential. Nothing in this Article shall preclude a Party from disclosing to the
public statements of its own positions or its submissions, but a Party shall not disclose and
treat as confidential, information or written submissions submitted by the other Party to the
arbitral panel which the latter Party has designated as confidential. Where a Party has

provided information or written submissions designed to be confidential, that Party shall
provide a non-confidential summary of the information or written submissions which may
be disclosed publicly.

3. The arbitral panel should consult with the Parties as appropriate and provide
adequate opportunities for the development of a mutually satisfactory settlement of the
dispute.

4. The Parties shall transmit to the arbitral panel written submissions in which they
present the facts of their cases and their arguments and shall do so within the following
time limits:

(a) for the Party which requested the establishment of the arbitral panel, within
thirty (30) days of the establishment of that panel; and

(b) for the other Party, within thirty (30) days of the transmission of the written
submission of the Party which requested the establishment of the arbitral
panel.

5. Each Party’s written submissions, including any comments on the draft report made
in accordance with Article 14.12.3, written versions of oral statements and responses to
questions put by the arbitral panel shall be made available to the other Party.

6. At the request of a Party, or on its own initiative, the arbitral panel may seek
information and technical advice from any person or body that it deems appropriate, and
subject to such terms and conditions as the Parties may set. The arbitral panel shall provide
the Parties with a copy of any advice or opinion obtained and an opportunity to provide
comments.

7. The arbitral panel shall, in consultation with the Parties, regulate its own procedures
governing the rights of Parties to be heard and its own deliberations where such procedures
are not otherwise set out in this Chapter and in Annex 14.10.

8. Any time period or other rules and procedures for arbitral panels provided for in
this Chapter, including Annex 14.10, may be modified by mutual consent of the Parties.
The Parties may also agree at any time not to apply any provision of this Chapter.

Article 14.11: Suspension or Termination of Proceedings

1. Where the Parties agree, an arbitral panel may suspend its work at any time for a
period not exceeding twelve (12) months. In the event of such a suspension, all relevant
time-frames set out in this Chapter and in Annex 14.10 shall be extended by the amount of
time that the work was suspended. If the work of the arbitral panel has been suspended for
more than twelve (12) months, the arbitral panel’s authority for considering the dispute
shall lapse unless the Parties agree otherwise.

2. The Parties may agree at any time to terminate the proceedings of the arbitral panel
established under this Chapter by jointly notifying the chair of that arbitral panel.

Article 14.12: Report

1. The report of the arbitral panel shall be drafted without the presence of the Parties.
The arbitral panel shall base its report on the relevant provisions of this Agreement and the
submissions and arguments of the Parties, and may take into account any other relevant
information provided to the arbitral panel.

2. The arbitral panel shall, within one hundred and twenty (120) days, or within sixty
(60) days in cases of urgency, including those which concern perishable goods, after the
date of its establishment, submit to the Parties its draft report.

3. The draft report shall contain both the descriptive part summarising the submissions
and arguments of the Parties, and the findings and determinations of the arbitral panel. If
the Parties agree, the arbitral panel may make recommendations for resolution of the
dispute in its report. The findings and determinations of the arbitral panel and, if
applicable, any recommendations cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations of
the Parties provided in this Agreement.

4. When the arbitral panel considers that it cannot submit its draft report within the
aforementioned one hundred and twenty (120) or sixty (60) day period, it may extend that
period with the consent of the Parties.

5. A Party may provide written comments to the arbitral panel on its draft report
within fifteen (15) days after the date of submission of the draft report.

6. After considering any written comments on the draft report, the arbitral panel may
reconsider its draft report and make any further examination it considers appropriate.

7. The arbitral panel shall issue its final report, within thirty (30) days after the date of
submission of the draft report. The report shall include any separate opinions on matters
not unanimously agreed, not disclosing which panelists are associated with majority or
minority opinions.

8. The final report of the arbitral panel shall be available to the public within fifteen
(15) days after the date of issuance, subject to the requirement to protect confidential
information.

Article 14.13: Implementation of the Report

1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Party complained against shall eliminate the
non-conformity as determined in the report of the arbitral panel immediately, or if this is
not practicable, within a reasonable period of time.

2. The Parties shall continue to consult at all times on the possible development of a
mutually satisfactory resolution.

3. The reasonable period of time referred to in paragraph 1 shall be mutually
determined by the Parties. Where the Parties fail to agree on the reasonable period of time
within forty five (45) days after the date of issuance of the report of the arbitral panel

referred to in Article 14.12, either Party may refer the matter to an arbitral panel as
provided for in Article 14.14.7, which shall determine the reasonable period of time.

4. Where there is disagreement between the Parties as to whether the Party
complained against eliminated the non-conformity, as determined in the report of the
arbitral panel, within the reasonable period of time as determined pursuant to paragraph 3,
either Party may refer the matter to an arbitral panel as provided for in Article 14.14.7.

Article 14.14: Non-Implementation — Compensation and Suspension of Concessions
or other Obligations

1. If the Party complained against notifies the complaining Party that it is
impracticable, or the arbitral panel to which the matter is referred pursuant to Article
14.13.4 confirms that the Party complained against has failed to eliminate the non-
conformity as determined in the report of the arbitral panel within the reasonable period of
time as determined pursuant to Article 14.13.3, the Party complained against shall, if so
requested, enter into negotiations with the complaining Party with a view to reaching
mutually satisfactory compensation.

2. If there is no agreement on satisfactory compensation within twenty (20) days after
the date of receipt of the request mentioned in paragraph 1, the complaining Party may
suspend the application to the Party complained against of concessions or other obligations
under this Agreement, after giving notification of such suspension thirty (30) days in
advance. Such notification may only be given twenty (20) days after the date of receipt of
the request mentioned in paragraph 1.

3. The compensation referred to in paragraph 1 and the suspension referred to in
paragraph 2 shall be temporary measures. Neither compensation nor suspension is
preferred to full elimination of the non-conformity as determined in the report of the
arbitral panel. The suspension shall only be applied until such time as the non-conformity
is fully eliminated or a mutually satisfactory solution is reached.

4. In considering what concessions or other obligations to suspend pursuant to
paragraph 2:

(a) the complaining Party should first seek to suspend concessions or other
obligations with respect to the same sector(s) as that in which the report of
the arbitral panel referred to in Article 14.12 has found a failure to comply
with the obligations under this Agreement; and

(b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not practicable or effective to
suspend concessions or other obligations with respect to the same sector(s),
it may suspend concessions or other obligations with respect to other
sectors. The notification of such suspension pursuant to paragraph 2 shall
indicate the reasons on which it is based.

5. The level of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall be equivalent to the level of
the nullification or impairment.

6. If the Party complained against considers that the requirements for the suspension
of concessions or other obligations by the complaining Party set out in paragraph 2, 3, 4 or
5 have not been met, it may refer the matter to an arbitral panel.

7. The arbitral panel that is established for the purposes of this Article or Article 14.13
shall have, wherever possible, as its panelists, the panelists of the original arbitral panel. If
this is not possible, then the panelists to the arbitral panel that is established for the
purposes of this Article or Article 14.13 shall be appointed pursuant to Article 14.7. The
arbitral panel established under this Article or Article 14.13 shall issue its report within
sixty (60) days after the date when the matter is referred to it. When the arbitral panel
considers that it cannot issue its report within the aforementioned sixty (60) day period, it
may extend that period for a maximum of thirty (30) days with the consent of the Parties.
The report shall be available to the public within fifteen (15) days after the date of
issuance, subject to the requirement to protect confidential information. The report shall be
final and binding on the Parties.

Chapter 15
Exceptions
Article 15.1: General Exceptions

1. For the purposes of Chapters 3 to 7 (Trade in Goods, Rules of Origin, Customs
Administration, Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, and Technical Barriers to Trade),
Article XX of GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and made part
of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis. The Parties understand that the measures referred to
in Article XX (b) of GATT 1994 include environmental measures necessary to protect
human, animal, or plant life or health, and that Article XX (g) of GATT 1994 applies to
measures relating to the conservation of living and nonliving exhaustible natural resources.

2. For the purposes of Chapters 9 (Trade in Services), Article XIV of GATS,
including its footnotes, is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XIV (b) of GATS
include environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal, or plant life or health.

3. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from taking action
authorised by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body. This is referring to a suspension of
concession. A Party taking such action shall inform the Commission to the fullest extent
possible of measures taken and of their termination.

Article 15.2: Security Exceptions
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a) to require a Party to furnish any information the disclosure of which it
considers contrary to its essential security interests;

(b) to prevent a Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for
the protection of its essential security interests:

(1) relating to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are
derived;

(11) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war
and to such traffic in other goods and materials, or relating to the
supply of services, as carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose
of supplying or provisioning a military establishment; or

(111) | taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or
(c) to prevent a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations
under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace

and security.

2. A Party taking action under paragraphs 1(b) and (c) shall inform the Commission to
the fullest extent possible of measures taken and of their termination.

Article 15.3: Taxation

1. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to taxation
measures.
2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of the Parties

under any tax convention or other arrangement on taxation in force between the Parties. In
the event of any inconsistency relating to a taxation measure between this Agreement and
any such convention or other arrangement on taxation, the latter shall prevail to the extent
of the inconsistency.

3. Any consultations between the Parties about whether an inconsistency relates to a
taxation measure shall be referred to the designated authorities of the Parties. The
designated authorities shall consider the issue and decide whether the tax convention or
arrangement prevails. If within twelve (12) months of the referral of the issue to the
designated authorities, they decide with respect to the measure that gives rise to the issue
that the tax convention or arrangement prevails, no procedures concerning that measure
may be initiated under Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement). Neither may such procedures be
initiated during the period the issue is under consideration by the designated authorities.

4. Article 3.3 (National Treatment) and other provisions of such Chapter as are
necessary to give effect to that Article shall apply to taxation measures to the same extent

as covered by GATT 1994.

5. Articles 9.4 (National Treatment) and 10.4 (National Treatment) shall apply to
taxation measures to the same extent as covered by GATS.

6. For the purposes of this Article, taxation measure means any measure relating to
direct or indirect taxes, but does not include:

(a) a customs duty; or

(b) the measures listed in paragraphs (b) and (c) of the definition of customs
duties in Article 2.1.

7. For the purposes of paragraph 2, designated authority means:
(a) in the case of Chile, the Director del Servicio de Impuestos Internos,
Ministerio de Hacienda, or an authorised representative of the Ministro de

Hacienda; and

(b) in the case of Thailand, the Fiscal Policy Office, Ministry of Finance, or
authorised representatives of the Ministry of Finance.

Article 15.4: Temporary Measures

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or
maintaining temporary restrictive measures with regard to trade in goods and services and
with regard to payments and capital movements:

(a) in the event of serious balance of payments or external financial difficulties
or threat thereof; or

(b) | where, in exceptional circumstances, payments and capital movements
cause or threaten to cause serious difficulties for macroeconomic
management, in particular, monetary policy or exchange rate policy in either
Party.

2. Measures referred to in paragraph | shall:

(a) be in accordance with the rights and obligations established in the WTO
Agreement and consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), as applicable;

(b) avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and financial
interests of the other Party;

(c) not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances set out in
paragraph 1;

(d) be temporary and be phased out or eliminated as soon as situation specified
in paragraph | improves; and

(e) be non-discriminatory.

3. Nothing in this Agreement shall be regarded to affect the rights enjoyed and
obligations undertaken by a Party as a party to the Articles of Agreement of the IMF.

4. A Party shall publish or notify to the other Party of any restrictions adopted or
maintained under paragraph 1, or any changes therein, to the extent that it does not
duplicate the process under the WTO and the IMF.

Article 15.5: Confidentiality and Disclosure of Information

1. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall, in accordance with
its laws and regulations, maintain the confidentiality of information designated as
confidential by the other Party pursuant to this Agreement.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as requiring a Party to furnish or
allow access to confidential information the disclosure of which would impede law
enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or which would prejudice the
legitimate commercial interests of particular juridical persons, whether public or private.

Chapter 16
Final Provisions
Article 16.1: Annexes and Footnotes

The Annexes and footnotes to this Agreement constitute an integral part of this
Agreement.

Article 16.2: Amendments

1. The Parties may agree, in writing, on any modification of or addition to this
Agreement.
2. When so agreed, and approved in accordance with the necessary domestic legal

procedures of each Party, a modification or addition shall constitute an integral part of this
Agreement. Such amendment shall enter into force sixty (60) days after the date of the last
written communication in which the Parties notify that such procedures have been
completed or after such other period as the Parties may agree.

Article 16.3: Amendment of the WTO Agreement

Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, if any provision of the WTO
Agreement that the Parties have incorporated into this Agreement is amended, the Parties
shall consult on whether to amend this Agreement.

Article 16.4: Future Work Programme

Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, no later than two (2) years after the entry
into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall initiate negotiations on investment and
review relevant Articles of this Agreement as necessary.

Article 16.5: Entry into Force and Termination

1. The entry into force of this Agreement is subject to the completion of necessary
domestic legal procedures by each Party.

2. This Agreement shall enter into force sixty (60) days after the date of the last
written communication in which the Parties notify that such procedures have been
completed, or after such other period as the Parties may agree.

3. Either Party may terminate this Agreement by written notification to the other
Party. This Agreement shall expire one hundred and eighty (180) days after the date of
such notification.

Article 16.6: Authentic Texts

The English, Spanish and Thai texts of this Agreement are equally authentic. In the
case of diversion, the English text shall prevail.