ASEAN TRADE IN GOODS AGREEMENT

RECALLING the Leaders’ decision to establish the ASEAN
Community, comprising three pillars, namely the ASEAN Political-
Security Community (APSC), the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC)
and the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community (ASCC), made in the
Declaration of ASEAN Concord II signed on 7 October 2003 in Bali,
Indonesia, and in the ASEAN Charter signed on 20 November 2007 in
Singapore;

DETERMINED to realise the goals of establishing ASEAN as a single
market and production base characterised by free flow of goods,
services, investment, skilled labour and freer flow of capital envisaged
in the ASEAN Charter and the Declaration on the ASEAN Economic
Community Blueprint signed by the Leaders on 20 November 2007 in
Singapore;

RECOGNISING the significant achievements and contribution of the
existing ASEAN economic agreements and instruments in various
areas in facilitating free flow of goods in the region, including the
Agreement on ASEAN Preferential Trading Arrangements (1977), the
Agreement on the Common Effective Preferential Tariff Scheme for the
ASEAN Free Trade Area (1992), the ASEAN Agreement on Customs
(1997), the ASEAN Framework Agreement on Mutual Recognition
Arrangements (1998), the e-ASEAN Framework Agreement (2000), the
Protocol Governing the Implementation of the ASEAN Harmonised
Tariff Nomenclature (2003), the ASEAN Framework Agreement for the
Integration of Priority Sectors (2004), the Agreement to Establish and
Implement the ASEAN Single Window (2005);

DESIRING to move forward by developing a comprehensive ASEAN
Trade in Goods Agreement which is built upon the commitments under
the existing ASEAN economic agreements to provide a_ legal
framework to realise free flow of goods in the region;

CONFIDENT that a comprehensive ASEAN Trade in Goods
Agreement would minimise barriers and deepen economic linkages
among Member States, lower business costs, increase trade,
investment and economic efficiency, create a larger market with
greater opportunities and larger economies of scale for the businesses
of Member States and create and maintain a competitive investment
area;

RECOGNISING the different stages of economic development
between and among Member States and the need to address the
development gaps and facilitate increasing participation of the Member
States, especially Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar and Viet Nam, in the
AEC through the provision of flexibility and technical and development
co-operation;

RECOGNISING FURTHER the provisions of the _ ministerial
declarations of the World Trade Organisation on measures in favour of
least-developed countries;

ACKNOWLEDGING _ the important role and contribution of the
business sector in enhancing trade and investment among Member
States and the need to further promote and facilitate their participation
through the various ASEAN business associations in the realisation of
the ASEAN Economic Community; and

RECOGNISING the role of regional trade arrangements as a catalyst in
accelerating regional and global trade liberalisation and _ trade
facilitation and as building blocks in the framework of the multilateral
trading system;

HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:

CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
Objective

The objective of this Agreement is to achieve free flow of goods in
ASEAN as one of the principal means to establish a single market and
production base for the deeper economic integration of the region
towards the realisation of the AEC by 2015.

Article 2
General Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Agreement, unless the context
otherwise requires:

(a)

ASEAN means the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, which comprises Brunei Darussalam, the
Kingdom of Cambodia, the Republic of Indonesia, Lao
PDR, Malaysia, the Union of Myanmar, the Republic of
the Philippines, the Republic of Singapore, the Kingdom
of Thailand and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam;

customs authorities means the competent authorities
that are responsible under the law of a Member State for
the administration of customs laws;

customs duties means any customs or import duty and
a charge of any kind imposed in connection with the
importation of a good, but does not include any:

(i) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed
consistently with the provisions of paragraph 2 of
Article Ill of GATT 1994, in respect of the like
domestic goods or in respect of goods from which
the imported goods have been manufactured or
produced in whole or in part;

(ii) anti-dumping or countervailing duty applied
consistent with the provisions of Article VI of GATT
1994, the Agreement on Implementation of Article
Vl of GATT 1994, and the Agreement on Subsidies
and Countervailing Measures in Annex 1A to the
WTO Agreement; or

(iii) | fee or any charge commensurate with the cost of
services rendered.

customs laws means such laws and_ regulations
administered and enforced by the customs authorities of
each Member State concerning the importation,
exportation, transit, transhipment, and storage of goods
as they relate to customs duties, charges, and other
taxes, or to prohibitions, restrictions, and other similar
controls with respect to the movement of controlled items
across the boundary of the customs territory of each
Member State;

customs value of goods means the value of goods for
the purposes of levying ad valorem customs duties on
imported goods;

days means calendar days, including weekends and
holidays;

foreign exchange restrictions means measures taken
by Member States in the form of restrictions and other
administrative procedures in foreign exchange which
have the effect of restricting trade;

GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade 1994, including its Notes and Supplementary
Provisions, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement;

Harmonised System or HS means the Harmonised
Commodity Description and Coding System set out in the
Annex to the International Convention on the Harmonised
Commodity Description and Coding System, including
any amendments adopted and implemented by the
Member States in their respective laws;

MFN means Most-Favoured-Nation treatment in the
WTO;

non-tariff barriers means measures other than tariffs
which effectively prohibit or restrict imports or exports of
goods within Member States;

originating goods means goods that qualify as
originating in a Member State in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 3;

preferential tariff treatment means tariff concessions
granted to originating goods as reflected by the tariff rates
applicable under this Agreement;

quantitative restrictions means measures intended to
prohibit or restrict quantity of trade with other Member
States, whether made effective through quotas, licences
or other measures with equivalent effect, including
administrative measures and requirements which restrict
trade;

(0) this Agreement or ATIGA means the ASEAN Trade in
Goods Agreement;

(0) WTO means the World Trade Organisation; and

(q) WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organisation, done on 15
April 1994 and the other agreements negotiated
thereunder.

2. In this Agreement, all words in the singular shall include the
plural and all words in the plural shall include the singular, unless
otherwise indicated in the context.

Article 3
Classification of Goods

For the purposes of this Agreement, the classification of goods in trade
between and among Member States shall be in accordance with the
ASEAN Harmonised Tariff Nomenclature (AHTN) as set out in the
Protocol Governing the Implementation of the ASEAN Harmonised
Tariff Nomenclature signed on 7 August 2003 and any amendments
thereto.

Article 4
Product Coverage

This Agreement shall apply to all products under the ASEAN
Harmonised Tariff Nomenclature (AHTN).

Article 5
Most Favoured Nation Treatment

With respect to import duties, after this Agreement enters into force, if a
Member State enters into any agreement with a non-Member State
where commitments are more favourable than that accorded under this
Agreement, the other Member States have the right to request for
negotiations with that Member State to request for the incorporation
herein of treatment no less favourable than that provided under the
aforesaid agreement. The decision to extend such tariff preference will
be on a unilateral basis. The extension of such tariff preference shall
be accorded to all Member States.

Article 6

National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation

Each Member State shall accord national treatment to the goods of the
other Member States in accordance with Article Ill of GATT 1994. To
this end, Article Ill of GATT 1994 is incorporated into and shall form
part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 7
Fees and Charges Connected with Importation and Exportation

1. Each Member State shall ensure, in accordance with Article
VIII.1 of GATT 1994, that all fees and charges of whatever character
(other than import or export duties, charges equivalent to an internal
tax or other internal charge applied consistently with Article III.2 of
GATT 1994, and anti-dumping and countervailing duties) imposed on
or in connection with import or export are limited in amount to the
approximate cost of services rendered and do not represent an indirect
protection to domestic goods or a taxation on imports or exports for
fiscal purposes.

2. Each Member State shall promptly publish details of the fees
and charges that it imposes in connection with importation or
exportation, and shall make such information available on the internet.

Article 8
General Exceptions

Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a
manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable
discrimination among Member States where the same _ conditions
prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade, nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement
by a Member State of measures:

(a) | necessary to protect public morals;
(b) | necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

(Cc) relating to the importations or exportations of gold or
silver;

(d) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations
which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Agreement, including those relating to customs
enforcement, the enforcement of monopolies operated
under paragraph 4 of Article Il and Article XVII of GATT

(e)

(9)

(h)

(i)

(j)

1994, the protection of patents, trademarks and
copyrights, and the prevention of deceptive practices;

relating to the products of prison labour;

imposed for the protection of national treasures of artistic,
historic or archaeological value;

relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural
resources if such measures are made effective in
conjunction with restrictions on domestic production or
consumption;

undertaken in pursuance of the obligations under any
intergovernmental commodity agreement which conforms
to criteria submitted to the WTO and not disapproved by it
or which is itself so submitted and not so disapproved;

involving restrictions on exports of domestic materials
necessary to ensure essential quantities of such
materials to a domestic processing industry during
periods when the domestic price of such materials is held
below the world price as part of a governmental
stabilisation plan, provided that such restrictions shall not
operate to increase the exports of or the protection
afforded to such domestic industry, and shall not depart
from the provisions of this Agreement relating to non-
discrimination; and

essential to the acquisition or distribution of products in
general or local short supply, provided that any such
measures shall be consistent with the principle that all
Member States are entitled to an equitable share of the
international supply of such products, and that any such
measures, which are inconsistent with the other
provisions of this Agreement shall be discontinued as
soon as the conditions giving rise to them have ceased to
exist.

Article 9
Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a) to require any Member State to furnish any information,
the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its
essential security interests; or

(b) to prevent any Member State from taking any action
which it considers necessary for the protection of its
essential security interests:

(i) relating to fissionable materials or the materials
from which they are derived;

(il) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and
implements of war and to such traffic in other
goods and materials as is carried on directly or
indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military
establishment;

(iii) | taken so as to protect critical public infrastructure,
including communications, power and_ water
infrastructures, from deliberate attempts intended
to disable or degrade such infrastructure;

(iv) taken in time of domestic emergency, or war or
other emergency in international relations; or

(C) to prevent any Member State from taking any action in
pursuance of its obligations under the United Nations
Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

Article 10
Measures to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Member
State from taking any measure for balance-of-payments purposes. A
Member State taking such measure shall do so in accordance with the
conditions established under Article XII of GATT 1994 and the
Understanding on Balance-of-Payments Provisions of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement.

Article 11
Notification Procedures

1. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, Member States
shall notify any action or measure that they intend to take:

(a) — which may nullify or impair any benefit to other Member
States, directly or indirectly under this Agreement; or

(bo) | when the action or measure may impede the attainment
of any objective of this Agreement.

2. Without affecting the generality of the obligations of Member
States under paragraph 1 of this Article, the notification procedures
shall apply, but need not be limited, to changes in the measures as
listed in Annex 1 and amendments thereto.

3. A Member State shall make a notification to Senior Economic
Officials Meeting (SEOM) and the ASEAN Secretariat before effecting
such action or measure referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, notification shall be
made at least sixty (60) days before such an action or measure is to
take effect. A Member State proposing to apply an action or measure
shall provide adequate opportunity for prior discussion with those
Member States having an interest in the action or measure concerned.

4, The notification of the intended action or measure submitted by
a Member State shall include:

(a) a description of the action or measure to be taken;
(b) the reasons for undertaking the action or measure; and

(c) the intended date of implementation and the duration of
the action or measure.

5. The contents of the notification and all information relating to it
shall be treated with confidentiality.

6. The ASEAN Secretariat shall act as the central registry of
notifications, including written comments and results of discussions.
The Member State concerned shall furnish the ASEAN Secretariat with
a copy of the comments received. The ASEAN Secretariat shall draw
the attention of individual Member States to notification requirements,
such as those stipulated in paragraph 4 of this Article, which remain

incomplete. The ASEAN Secretariat shall make available information
regarding individual notifications on request to any Member State.

7. The Member State concerned shall, without discrimination, allow
adequate opportunities for other Member States to present their
comments in writing and discuss these comments upon request.
Discussions entered into by the Member State concerned with other
Member States shall be for the purpose of seeking further clarification
about the action or measure. The Member State may give due
consideration to these written comments and the discussion in the
implementation of the action or measure.

8. Other Member States shall present their comments within fifteen
(15) days of the notification. Failure of a Member State to provide
comments within the stipulated time shall not affect its right to seek
recourse under Article 88.

Article 12
Publication and Administration of Trade Regulations

1. Article X of GATT 1994 shall be incorporated into and form an
integral part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. To the extent possible, each Member State shall make laws,
regulations, decisions and rulings of the kind referred to in Article X of
GATT 1994 available on the internet.

Article 13
ASEAN Trade Repository

1. An ASEAN Trade Repository containing trade and customs laws
and procedures of all Member States shall be established and made
accessible to the public through the internet.

2. The ASEAN Trade Repository shall contain trade related
information such as (i) tariff nomenclature; (ii) MFN tariffs, preferential
tariffs offered under this Agreement and other Agreements of ASEAN
with its Dialogue Partners; (iii) Rules of Origin; (iv) non-tariff measures;
(v) national trade and customs laws and rules; (vi) procedures and
documentary requirements; (vii) administrative rulings; (villi) best
practices in trade facilitation applied by each Member State; and (ix)
list of authorised traders of Member States.

3. The ASEAN Secretariat shall maintain and update the ASEAN

Trade Repository based on the notifications submitted by Member
States as set out in Article 11.

10

Article 14
Confidentiality

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall require a Member State to
provide confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede
law enforcement of the Member State, or otherwise be contrary to the
public interest, or which would prejudice legitimate commercial
interests of any particular enterprise, public or private.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a
Member State to provide information relating to the affairs and
accounts of customers of financial institutions.

3. Each Member State shall, in accordance with its laws and
regulations, maintain the confidentiality of information provided as
confidential by another Member State pursuant to this Agreement.

4. Notwithstanding the above, paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article
shall not apply to Chapter 6.

Article 15
Communications

All official communications and documentation exchanged among the
Member States relating to the implementation of this Agreement shall
be in writing and in the English language.

Article 16
Participation Enhancement of Member States

Enhancing participation of Member States shall be facilitated through a
negotiated pre-agreed flexibility on provisions under this Agreement.
Such pre-agreed flexibility shall be captured in the respective
provisions hereunder.

Article 17
Capacity Building

Capacity building shall be provided through effective implementation of
programmes to strengthen individual Member States’ domestic
capacity, efficiency and competitiveness, such as the Work Programme
under the Initiative for ASEAN Integration (IAI) and other capacity
building initiatives.

11

Article 18
Regional and Local Government and Non-Governmental Bodies

1. Each Member State shall take such reasonable measures as
may be available to it to ensure observance of provisions of this
Agreement by the regional and local government and authorities within
its territories.

2. In fulfilling its obligations and commitments under this
Agreement, each Member State shall endeavour to ensure their
observance by non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers
delegated by central, regional or local governments or authorities within
its territory.

CHAPTER 2
TARIFF LIBERALISATION

Article 19
Reduction or Elimination of Import Duties

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, Member
States shall eliminate import duties on all products traded between the
Member States by 2010 for ASEAN-6' and by 2015, with flexibility to
2018, for CLMV*.

2. Each Member State shall reduce and/or eliminate import duties
on originating goods of the other Member States in accordance with
the following modalities:

(a) Import duties on the products listed in Schedule A of
each Member State’s tariff liberalisation schedule shall be
eliminated by 2010 for ASEAN-6 and 2015 for CLMV, in
accordance with the schedule set out therein. Schedule A
of each Member State shall ensure the following
conditions are met:

(i) For ASEAN-6, by 1 January 2009:

- Import duties of at least eighty percent (80%)

" “ASEAN-6” refers to Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,

Singapore and Thailand.

* “CLMV” refers to Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar and Viet Nam.

12

(b)

(d)

tariff lines are eliminated;

- Import duties on all Information § and
Communications Technology (ICT) products,
as defined in the e-ASEAN Framework
Agreement, are eliminated;

- Import duties on all Priority Integration Sectors
(PIS) products are at zero percent (0%), except
those listed in the accompanying negative lists
to the Protocols of the ASEAN Framework
Agreement for the Integration of Priority
Sectors and any amendments thereto; and

- Import duties on all products are equal to or
less than five percent (5%);

(ii) For Lao PDR, Myanmar and Viet Nam, import
duties on all products are equal to or less than five
percent (5%) by 1 January 2009;

(iii) | For Cambodia, import duties of at least eighty
percent (80%) tariff lines are equal to or less than
five percent (5%) by 1 January 2009; and

(iv) Import duties on some products of CLMV, not
exceeding seven percent (7%) of tariff lines, shall
be eliminated by 2018. The list of the products and
schedule of import duties reduction of these
products shall be identified by CLMV no later than
1 January 2014;

Import duties on ICT products listed in Schedule B of
each CLMV Member State shall be eliminated in three (3)
tranches by 2008, 2009 and 2010 in accordance with the
schedule set out therein;

Import duties on PIS products listed in Schedule C of
each CLMV Member State shall be eliminated by 2012 in
accordance with the schedule set out therein;

Import duties on unprocessed agricultural products listed
in Schedule D of each Member State on its own accord
shall be reduced or eliminated to zero to five percent (0-
5%) by 2010 for ASEAN-6; 2013 for Viet Nam; 2015 for

13

Lao PDR and Myanmar; and 2017 for Cambodia, in
accordance with the schedule set out therein.
Notwithstanding this, import duties on sugar products of
Viet Nam shall be reduced to zero to five percent (0-5%)
by 2010;

(e) | Unprocessed agricultural products placed in Schedule E
of each Member State on its own accord shall have their
respective applied MFN import duties reduced in
accordance with the schedule set out therein;

(f) The products listed in Schedule F of Thailand and Viet
Nam, respectively, shall have their out-quota tariff rates
reduced in accordance with the tariff reduction schedules
corresponding to their respective product classification;

(g) Import duties on petroleum products listed in Schedule G
of Cambodia and Viet Nam, respectively, shall be
reduced in accordance with the schedule as mutually
agreed by all Member States and set out therein;

(h) The products placed in Schedule H of each Member
State shall not be subject to import duties reduction or
elimination for the reasons as provided in Article 8;

(i) Reduction and elimination of import duties shall be
implemented on 1 January of each year; and

(j) The base rates from which import duties are to be
reduced or eliminated shall be the Common Effective
Preferential Tariffs (CEPT) rates at the time of entry into
force of this Agreement.

3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no Member
State shall nullify or impair any tariff concessions applied in accordance
with the tariff schedules in Annex 2 referred to in paragraph 5 of this
Article.

4. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no Member
State may increase an existing duty specified in the schedules made
pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 2 of this Article on imports of
an originating good.

5. Except as provided in paragraph 2(a)(iv) of this Article, the
detailed tariff schedules to implement the modalities of reduction and/or
elimination of import duties set out in paragraph 2 of this Article shall
be finalised before the entry into force of this Agreement for ASEAN-6

14

and six (6) months after the entry into force of this Agreement for
CLMV, and form an integral part of this Agreement as Annex 2.

Article 20
Elimination of Tariff Rate Quotas

1. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Member
State undertakes not to introduce Tariff Rate Quotas (TRQs) on the
importation of any goods originating in other Member States or on the
exportation of any goods destined for the territory of the other Member
States.

2. Viet Nam and Thailand shall eliminate the existing TRQs as
follows:

(a) | Thailand shall eliminate in three (3) tranches by 1
January 2008, 2009 and 2010;

(b) Viet Nam shall eliminate in three (3) tranches by 1
January 2013, 2014 and 2015, with flexibility up to 2018.

Article 21
Issuance of Legal Enactments

1. (a) | Each Member State shall, no later than ninety (90) days
for ASEAN-6 and six (6) months for CLMV after the entry
into force of this Agreement, issue a legal enactment in
accordance with its laws and regulations to give effect to
the implementation of the tariff liberalisation schedules
committed under Article 19.

(b) The legal enactments issued pursuant to paragraph 1(a)
of this Article shall have retroactive implementation with
effect from 1 January of the year of the entry into force of
this Agreement.

(Cc) In the case where a single legal enactment could not be
issued, the legal enactments to give effect to the
implementation of tariff reduction or elimination of each
year shall be issued at least three (3) months before the
date of its effective implementation.

2. Member States may decide to conduct reviews of the products
in Schedules D and E with a view to improving the market access for
these products. If a product subject to the review is agreed to be
phased out of the said Schedules, it will be placed in Schedule A of the

15

respective Member State(s) and be subjected to the import duty
elimination of that Schedule.

Article 22
Enjoyment of Concessions

1. Products on which tariffs of the exporting Member State have
reached or are at the rate of twenty percent (20%) or below, and satisfy
the requirements on rules of origin as set out in Chapter 3 shall
automatically enjoy the concessions offered by importing Member
States as stated in accordance with the provisions of Article 19.

2. Products listed in Schedule H shall not be entitled for tariff
concessions offered under this Agreement.

Article 23
Temporary Modification or Suspension of Concessions

1. In exceptional circumstances other than those covered under
Article 10, Article 24 and Article 86 where a Member State faces
unforeseen difficulties in implementing its tariff commitments, that
Member State may temporarily modify or suspend a concession
contained in its Schedules under Article 19.

2. A Member State which seeks to invoke the provision of
paragraph 1 of this Article (hereinafter referred to as the “applicant
Member State”), shall notify in writing of such temporary modification or
suspension of concessions to the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA)
Council at least one hundred and eighty (180) days prior to the date
when the temporary modification or suspension of concessions is to
take effect.

3. Member States who are interested in engaging in consultations
or negotiations with the applicant Member State, pursuant to paragraph
4 of this Article, shall notify all ASEAN Member States of this interest
within ninety (90) days following the applicant Member State’s
notification of the temporary modification or suspension of
concessions.

4, After making the notification pursuant to paragraph 2 of this
Article, the applicant Member State shall engage in consultations or
negotiations with the Member States who have made notification
pursuant to paragraph 3 of this Article. In negotiations with Member

16

States with substantial supplying interest, the applicant Member State
shall maintain a level of reciprocal and mutually advantageous
concessions no less favourable to the trade of all other Member States
of substantial supplying interest than that provided in this Agreement
prior to such negotiations, which may _ include compensatory
adjustments with respect to other goods. Compensatory adjustment
measures in form of tariffs shall be extended to all Member States on a
non-discriminatory basis.

5. The AFTA Council shall be notified of the outcome of the
consultations or negotiations pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 of this
Article at least forty five (45) days before the applicant Member State
intends to effect the temporary modification or suspension of
concessions. The notification shall include the applicant Member
State’s justifications for needing to adopt such measures and shall
provide the Member State’s intended schedule pertaining to the
modification or suspension of concessions and the time period for
which the Member State intends to apply the measures.

6. In the event that no agreement is reached after the consultations
or negotiations pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 of this Article, the
notification to the AFTA Council shall also include the request for the
AFTA Council's recommendation.

7. The AFTA Council shall issue its approval or recommendation
within thirty (30) days upon receipt of the notification pursuant to
paragraph 5 of this Article.

8. In the event that the circumstances giving rise to the request for
the temporary modification or suspension of concessions cease to
exist, the applicant Member State shall immediately restore the tariff
concessions and notify the AFTA Council accordingly. Upon restoration
of tariff concessions or termination of the suspension, the applicant
Member State shall apply the rate which it would have applied
according to the scheduled commitments as if the delay or suspension
had not occurred.

9. In the event that there is no approval or recommendation by the
AFTA Council pursuant to paragraph 7 of this Article, and the applicant
Member State nevertheless proceeds with the temporary modification

> A Member State shall be deemed to have “substantial supplying interest” if it has,
or because of the tariff concessions, it is to be reasonably expected to have, a
significant share of at least twenty percent (20%) of the total import from ASEAN of
such products during the past three (3) years in average in the market of the
applicant Member State.

17

or suspension of the concession, Member States with substantial
supplying interest shall be free to take action after thirty (30) days, but
not later than ninety (90) days after the applicant Member State effects
its modification or suspension of concessions, to modify or suspend
substantially equivalent concessions from the applicant Member State.
The concerned Member States shall immediately notify the AFTA
Council of such actions.

Article 24
Special Treatment on Rice and Sugar

The Protocol to Provide Special Consideration for Rice and Sugar
signed on 23 August 2007 shall form an integral part of this Agreement.

CHAPTER 3
RULES OF ORIGIN

Article 25
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) aquaculture means the farming of aquatic organisms
including fish, molluscs, crustaceans, other aquatic
invertebrates and aquatic plants, from feedstock such as
eggs, fry, fingerlings and larvae, by intervention in the
rearing or growth processes to enhance production such
as regular stocking, feeding, or protection from predators;

(b) Costs, Insurance and Freight (CIF) means the value of
the goods imported, and includes the costs of freight and
insurance up to the port or place of entry into the country
of importation. The valuation shall be made_ in
accordance with Article VII of GATT 1994 and the
Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of GATT
1994 as contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

(C) FOB means the free-on-board value of the goods,
inclusive of the costs of transport to the port or site of final
shipment abroad. The valuation shall be made _ in
accordance with Article VII of GATT 1994 and the
Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of GATT
1994 as contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

18

(d)

(e)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)
means the recognised consensus or _ substantial
authoritative support in the territory of a Member State,
with respect to the recording of revenues, expenses,
costs, assets and liabilities; the disclosure of information;
and the preparation of financial statements. These
standards may encompass broad guidelines of general
application as well as detailed standards, practices and
procedures;

goods shall include materials and/or products, which can
be wholly obtained or produced, even if they are intended
for later use as materials in another production process.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms “goods” and
“products” can be used interchangeably;

identical and_ interchangeable materials means
materials being of the same kind and commercial quality,
possessing the same_ technical and_ physical
characteristics, and which after being incorporated into
the finished product cannot be distinguished from one
another for origin purposes by virtue of any markings,
etc.;

materials means any matter or substance used or
consumed in the production of goods or physically
incorporated into another good or are subject to a
process in the production of another good;

originating goods or originating material means
goods or material that qualifies as originating in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter;

packing materials and containers for transportation
means the goods used to protect a good during its
transportation, different from those containers’ or
materials used for its retail sale;

production means methods of obtaining goods, including
growing, mining, harvesting, raising, breeding, extracting,
gathering, collecting, capturing, fishing, trapping, hunting,
manufacturing, producing, processing or assembling
goods; and

product specific rules means rules that specify that the
materials have undergone a change in tariff classification

19

or a specific manufacturing or processing operation, or
satisfy a Regional Value Content criterion or a
combination of any of these criteria.

Article 26
Origin Criteria

For the purposes of this Agreement, a good imported into the territory
of a Member State from another Member State shall be treated as an
originating good if it conforms to the origin requirements under any one
of the following conditions:

(a)

(b)

a good which is wholly obtained or produced in the
exporting Member State as set out and defined in Article
2/; or

a good not wholly obtained or produced in the exporting
Member State, provided that the said goods are eligible
under Article 28 or Article 30.

Article 27
Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

Within the meaning of Article 26(a), the following shall be considered
as wholly obtained or produced in the exporting Member State:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(e)

Plant and plant products, including fruit, flowers,
vegetables, trees, seaweed, fungi and live plants, grown
and harvested, picked or gathered in the exporting
Member State;

Live animals, including mammals, _ birds, _ fish,
crustaceans, molluscs, reptiles, bacteria and viruses,
born and raised in the exporting Member State;

Goods obtained from live animals in the exporting
Member State;

Goods obtained from hunting, trapping, fishing, farming,
aquaculture, gathering or capturing conducted in the
exporting Member State;

Minerals and other naturally occurring substances, not
included in paragraphs (a) to (d) of this Article, extracted
or taken from its soil, waters, seabed or beneath its
seabed;

20

(9)

(h)

(j)

(k)

Products of sea-fishing taken by vessels registered with a
Member State and entitled to fly its flag and other
products* taken from the waters, seabed or beneath the
seabed outside the territorial waters? of that Member
State, provided that that Member State has the rights to
exploit such waters, seabed and beneath the seabed in
accordance with international law°®:

Products of sea-fishing and other marine products taken
from the high seas by vessels registered with a Member
State and entitled to fly the flag of that Member State;

Products processed and/or made on board factory ships
registered with a Member State and entitled to fly the flag
of that Member State, exclusively from products referred
to in paragraph (g) of this Article;

Articles collected there which can no longer perform their
Original purpose nor are capable of being restored or
repaired and are fit only for disposal or recovery of parts
of raw materials, or for recycling purposes;

Waste and scrap derived from:

(i) production in the exporting Member State; or

(ii) used goods collected in the exporting Member
State, provided that such goods are fit only for the
recovery of raw materials; and

Goods obtained or produced in the exporting Member
State from products referred to in paragraphs (a) to (j) of
this Article.

Article 28
Not Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

* “Other products” refers to minerals and other naturally occurring substances extracted from the waters, seabed or beneath the seabed outside the territorial
waters.

For products of sea-fishing obtained from outside the territorial waters (e.g.
Exclusive Economic Zone), originating status would be conferred to that Member
State with whom the vessels used to obtain such products are registered with and
whose flag is flown in the said vessel, and provided that that Member State has the
rights to exploit it under international law.

In accordance with international law, registration of vessels could only be made in
one Member State.

21

(b)

(b)

(c)

(d)

For the purposes of Article 26(b), goods shall be deemed
to be originating in the Member State where working or
processing of the goods has taken place:

(i) if the goods have a regional value content
(hereinafter referred to as “ASEAN Value Content”
or the “Regional Value Content (RVC)”) of not less
than forty percent (40%) calculated using the
formula set out in Article 29; or

(ii) if all non-originating materials used in the
production of the goods have undergone a change
in tariff classification (hereinafter referred to as
“CTC”) at four-digit level (i.e. a change in tariff
heading) of the Harmonised System.

Each Member State shall permit the exporter of the good
to decide whether to use paragraph 1(a)(i) or 1(a)(ii) of
this Article when determining whether the goods qualify
as originating goods of the Member State.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this Article, goods listed
in Annex 3 shall qualify as originating goods if the goods
satisfy the product specific rules set out therein.

Where a product specific rule provides a choice of rules
from a RVC-based rule of origin, a CTC-based rule of
origin, a specific manufacturing or processing operation,
or a combination of any of these, each Member State
shall permit the exporter of the goods to decide which
rule to use in determining whether the goods qualify as
originating goods of the Member State.

Where product specific rules specify a certain RVC, it is
required that the RVC of a good is calculated using the
formula set out in Article 29.

Where product specific rules requiring that the materials
used have undergone CTC or a specific manufacturing or
processing operation, the rules shall apply only to non-
originating materials.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, a good which
is covered by Attachment A or B of the Ministerial Declaration on Trade
in Information Technology Products adopted in the Ministerial

22

Conference of the WTO on 13 December 1996, set out as Annex 4,
shall be deemed to be originating in a Member State if it is assembled
from materials covered under the same Annex.

Article 29
Calculation of Regional Value Content

1. For the purposes of Article 28, the formula for calculating
ASEAN Value Content or RVC is as follows:

(a) Direct Method

ASEAN Direct Direct Other
Material + Labour + Overhead + Cost +. Profit
Cost Cost Cost °
RVC = —_ i x 100 %
FOB Price
or

(b) = Indirect Method

Value of Non-
. Originating Materials,
FOB Price Parts or Goods
RVC = x 100 %
FOB Price

2. For the purposes of calculating the RVC provided in paragraph 1
of this Article:

(a) ASEAN Material Cost is the CIF value of originating
materials, parts or goods that are acquired or self-
produced by the producer in the production of the good;

(6) Value of Non-Originating Materials, Parts or Goods
shall be:

(i) The CIF value at the time of importation of the
goods or importation can be proven; or

23

(d)

(e)

(ii) The earliest ascertained price paid for the goods of
undetermined origin in the territory of the Member
State where the working or processing takes
place;

Direct labour cost shall include wages, remuneration
and other employee benefits associated with the
manufacturing process;

The calculation of direct overhead cost shall include,
but is not limited to, real property items associated with
the production process (insurance, factory rent and
leasing, depreciation on _ buildings, repair and
maintenance, taxes, interests on mortgage); leasing of
and interest payments for plant and equipment; factory
security; insurance (plant, equipment and materials used
in the manufacture of the goods); utilities (energy,
electricity, water and other utilities directly attributable to
the production of the goods); research, development,
design and engineering; dies, moulds, tooling and the
depreciation, maintenance and repair of plant and
equipment; royalties or licences (in connection with
patented machines or processes used in the manufacture
of the goods or the right to manufacture the goods);
inspection and testing of materials and the goods;
storage and handling in the factory; disposal of recyclable
wastes; and cost elements in computing the value of raw
materials, i.e. port and clearance charges and import
duties paid for dutiable component; and

FOB price means the free-on-board value of the goods
as defined in Article 25. FOB price shall be determined by
adding the value of materials, production cost, profit and
other costs.

Member States shall determine and adhere to only one (1)

method of calculating the RVC. Member States shall be given the
flexibility to change their calculation method provided that such change
is notified to the AFTA Council at least six (6) months prior to the
adoption of the new method. Any verification to the ASEAN Value
Content calculation by the importing Member State shall be done on
the basis of the method used by the exporting Member State.

In determining the ASEAN Value Content, Member States shall

closely adhere to the guidelines for costing methodologies set out in
Annex 5.

24

5. Locally-procured materials produced by established licensed
manufacturers, in compliance with domestic regulations, shall be
deemed to have fulfilled the origin requirement of this Agreement;
locally-procured materials from other sources shall be subjected to the
origin verification pursuant to Article 57 for the purpose of origin
determination.

6. The value of goods under this Chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of Article 57.

Article 30
Accumulation

1. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, goods originating
in a Member State, which are used in another Member State as
materials for finished goods eligible for preferential tariff treatment,
shall be considered to be originating in the latter Member State where
working or processing of the finished goods has taken place.

2. If the RVC of the material is less than forty percent (40%), the
qualifying ASEAN Value Content to be cumulated using the RVC
criterion shall be in direct proportion to the actual domestic content
provided that it is equal to or more than twenty percent (20%). The
Implementing Guidelines are set out in Annex 6.

Article 31
Minimal Operations and Processes

1. Operations or processes undertaken, by themselves or in
combination with each other for the purposes listed below, are
considered to be minimal and shall not be taken into account in
determining whether a good has been originating in one Member State:

(a) | ensuring preservation of goods in good condition for the
purposes of transport or storage;

(b) — facilitating shipment or transportation; and

(Cc) packaging or presenting goods for sale.

25

2. A good originating in the territory of a Member State shall retain
its initial originating status, when exported from another Member State,
where operations undertaken have not gone beyond those referred to
in paragraph 1 of this Article.

Article 32
Direct Consignment

1. Preferential tariff treatment shall be applied to goods satisfying
the requirements of this Chapter and which are consigned directly
between the territories of the exporting Member State and the
importing Member State.

2. The following shall be considered as consigned directly from the
exporting Member State to the importing Member State:

(a) | goods transported from an exporting Member State to the
importing Member State; or

(6b) | goods transported through one or more Member States,
other than the exporting Member State and the importing
Member State, or through a non-Member State, provided
that:

(i) the transit entry is justified for geographical reason
or by consideration related exclusively to transport
requirements;

(il) the goods have not entered into trade or
consumption there; and

(ili) | the goods have not undergone any operation there
other than unloading and reloading or any other
operation to preserve them in good condition.

Article 33
De Minimis

1. A good that does not undergo a change in tariff classification
shall be considered as originating if the value of all non-originating
materials used in its production that do not undergo the required
change in tariff classification does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the
FOB value of the good and the good meets all other applicable criteria
set forth in this Agreement for qualifying as an originating good.

26

2. The value of non-originating materials referred to in paragraph 1
of this Article shall, however, be included in the value of non-originating
materials for any applicable RVC requirement for the good.

Article 34
Treatment of Packages and Packing Materials

1. Packaging and Packing Materials for retail sale:

(a) If a good is subject to the RVC-based rule of origin, the
value of the packaging and packing materials for retail
sale shall be taken into account in its origin assessment,
where the packaging and packing materials for retail sale
are considered to be forming a whole with the good.

(6b) | Where paragraph 1 (a) of this Article is not applicable,
the packaging and packing materials for retail sale, when
classified together with the packaged good shall not be
taken into account in considering whether all non-
originating materials used in the manufacture of a product
fulfils the criterion corresponding to a change of tariff
classification of the said good.

2. The containers and packing materials exclusively used for the
transport of a good shall not be taken into account for determining the
origin of the said good.

Article 35
Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools

1. If a good is subject to the requirements of CTC or specific
manufacturing or processing operation, the origin of accessories, spare
parts, tools and instructional or other information materials presented
with the good shall not be taken into account in determining whether
the good qualifies as an originating good, provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or
other information materials are not invoiced separately
from the good; and

(b) the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts,
tools and instructional or other information materials are
customary for the good.

2. If a good is subject to the RVC-based rule of origin, the value of
the accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or other

2/7

information materials shall be taken into account as the value of the
Originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, in
calculating the RVC of the originating good.

Article 36
Neutral Elements

In order to determine whether a good originates, it shall not be
necessary to determine the origin of the following which might be used
in its production and not incorporated into the good:

(a) fuel and energy;
(b) tools, dies and moulds;

(Cc) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of
equipment and buildings;

(d) lubricants, greases, compounding materials and other
materials used in production or used to operate
equipment and buildings;

(e) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and
supplies;

(f) equipment, devices and supplies used for testing or
inspecting the good;

(g) catalyst and solvent; and

(h) any other goods that are not incorporated into the good
but of which use in the production of the good can
reasonably be demonstrated to be a part of that
production.

Article 37
Identical and Interchangeable Materials

1. The determination of whether identical and interchangeable
materials are originating materials shall be made either by physical
segregation of each of the materials or by the use of generally
accepted accounting principles of stock control applicable, or inventory
management practice, in the exporting Member States.

28

2. Once a decision has been taken on the inventory management
method, that method shall be used throughout the fiscal year.

Article 38
Proof of Origin

A claim that a good shall be accepted as eligible
for preferential tariff treatment shall be
supported by a Proof of Origin in accordance
with the Operational Certification Procedures as
set out in Annex 8.

Article 39
Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin

1. For the purposes of the effective and uniform implementation of
this Chapter, a Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin shall be established
pursuant to Article 90.

2. The functions of the Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin shall
include:

(a) monitoring of the implementation and operation of this
Chapter;

(b) reviewing, aS and when necessary, this Chapter to
provide appropriate recommendations with the view to
enhancing this Chapter to make it responsive to the
dynamic changes in the regional and global production
processes so as to facilitate trade and investment among
Member States, promote a regional production network,
encourage the development of Small and Medium
Enterprises (SMEs) and narrowing the development

gaps,

(c) reviewing, as and when necessary, the operational
procedures of this Chapter with the view to simplifying the
procedures and making them transparent, predictable
and standardised, taking into account the best practices
of other regional and international trade agreements;

(d) considering any other matter as Member States may
agree related to this Chapter; and

29

(e) — carrying out other functions as may be delegated by the
CCA, SEOM and the AFTA Council.

3. The Sub-Committee on Rules of Origin shall be composed of
representatives of the Governments of Member States, and may invite
representatives of relevant entities other than the Governments of the
Member States with necessary expertise relevant to the issues to be
discussed, upon agreement of all Member States.

CHAPTER 4
NON-TARIFF MEASURES

Article 40
Application of Non-Tariff Measures

1. Each Member State shall not adopt or maintain any non-tariff
measure on the importation of any good of any other Member State or
on the exportation of any good destined for the territory of any other
Member State, except in accordance with its WTO rights and
obligations or in accordance with this Agreement.

2. Each Member State shall ensure the transparency of its non-
tariff measures permitted in paragraph 1 of this Article in accordance
with Article 12 and shall ensure that any such measures are not
prepared, adopted or applied with the view to, or with the effect of,
creating unnecessary obstacles in trade among the Member States.

3. Any new measure or modification to the existing measure shall
be duly notified in accordance with Article 11.

4. The database on non-tariff measures applied in Member States
shall be further developed and included in the ASEAN Trade
Repository as referred in Article 13.

Article 41
General Elimination of Quantitative Restrictions

30

Each Member State undertakes not to adopt or maintain any
prohibition or quantitative restriction on the importation of any goods of
the other Member States or on the exportation of any goods destined
for the territory of the other Member States, except in accordance with
its WTO rights and obligations or other provisions in this Agreement.
To this end, Article XI of GATT 1994, shall be incorporated into and
form part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 42
Elimination of Other Non-Tariff Barriers

1. Member States shall review the non-tariff measures in the
database referred to in paragraph 4 of Article 40 with a view to
identifying non-tariff barriers (NTBs) other than quantitative restrictions
for elimination. The elimination of the identified NTBs shall be dealt
with by the Co-ordinating Committee for the Implementation of the
ATIGA (CCA), the ASEAN Consultative Committee on Standards and
Quality (ACCSQ), the ASEAN Committee on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary (AC-SPS), the working bodies under ASEAN Directors-
General of Customs and other relevant ASEAN bodies, as appropriate,
in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, which shall submit
their recommendations on the identified non-tariff barriers to the AFTA
Council through SEOM.

2. Unless otherwise agreed by the AFTA Council, the identified
NTBs shall be eliminated in three (3) tranches as follows:

(a) Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand
shall eliminate in three (3) tranches by 1 January of 2008,
2009 and 2010;

(b) = The Philippines shall eliminate in three (3) tranches by 1
January of 2010, 2011 and 2012;

(Cc) Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar and Viet Nam shall
eliminate in three (3) tranches by 1 January of 2013,
2014 and 2015 with flexibilities up to 2018.

3. The list of identified NTBs to be eliminated in each tranche shall
be agreed upon by the AFTA Council meeting in the year before the
effective elimination date of such NTBs.

4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article, the CCA, in
consultation with the relevant ASEAN bodies, shall review any non-
tariff measure notified or reported by any other Member State or by the
private sector with a view to determining whether the measure
constitutes as a NTB. If such review results in an identification of a

31

NTB, the NTB shall be eliminated by the Member State applying such
NTB in accordance with this Agreement.

5. The CCA shall serve as a focal point for the notification and
review referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article.

6. Exceptions to this Article shall be allowed for the reasons
provided in Article 8.

f. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a
Member State, which is a party to the Basel Convention on the Control
of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal
or other relevant international agreements, from adopting or enforcing
any measure in relation to hazardous wastes or substances based on
its laws and regulations, in accordance with such _ international
agreements.

Article 43
Foreign Exchange Restrictions

Member States shall make exceptions to their foreign exchange
restrictions relating to payments for the products under this Agreement,
as well as repatriation of such payments without prejudice to their
rights under Article XVIII of GATT 1994 and relevant provisions of the
Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).

Article 44
Import Licensing Procedures

1. Each Member State shall ensure that all automatic and non-
automatic import licensing procedures are implemented in a
transparent and predictable manner, and applied in accordance with
the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures as contained in Annex
1A to the WTO Agreement.

2. Promptly after entry into force of this Agreement, each Member
State shall notify the other Member States of any existing import
licensing procedures. Thereafter, each Member State shall notify the
other Member States of any new import licensing procedure and any
modification to its existing import licensing procedures, to the extent
possible sixty (60) days before it takes effect, but in any case no later
than the effective date of the licensing requirement. A notification
provided under this Article shall include the information specified in
Article 5 of the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures as
contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement.

32

3. Each Member State shall answer within sixty (60) days all
reasonable enquiries from another Member State with regard to the
criteria employed by its respective licensing authorities in granting or
denying import licences. The importing Member State shall also
consider publication of such criteria.

4, Elements in non-automatic import licensing procedures that are
found to be impeding trade shall be identified, with a view to remove
such barriers, and to the extent possible work towards automatic import
licensing procedures.

CHAPTER 5
TRADE FACILITATION

Article 45
Work Programme on Trade Facilitation and its Objectives

1. Member States shall develop and implement a comprehensive
ASEAN Trade Facilitation Work Programme, which sets out all
concrete actions and measures with clear targets and timelines of
implementation necessary for creating a consistent, transparent, and
predictable environment for international trade transactions that
increases trading opportunities and help businesses, including small
and medium sized enterprises (SMEs), to save time and reduce costs.

2. The ASEAN Trade Facilitation Work Programme shall set out
actions and measures to be implemented at both ASEAN and national
levels.

Article 46
Scope of the ASEAN Trade Facilitation Work Programme

The ASEAN Trade Facilitation Work Programme referred to in Article
45 shall cover the areas of customs procedures, trade regulations and
procedures, standards and conformance, sanitary and phytosanitary
measures, ASEAN Single Window and other areas as identified by the
AFTA Council.

33

Article 47
Principles on Trade Facilitation

Member States shall be guided by the following principles in relation to
trade facilitation measures and initiatives at both ASEAN and national

levels:

(a)

(b)

(d)

(e)

Transparency: Information on policies, laws, regulations,
administrative rulings, licensing, certification, qualification
and registration requirements, technical regulations,
standards, guidelines, procedures and practices relating
to trade in goods (hereinafter referred to as “rules and
procedures relating to trade”) to be made available to all
interested parties, consistently and in a timely manner at
no cost or a reasonable cost;

Communications and Consultations: The authorities shall
endeavour to facilitate and promote effective mechanisms
for exchanges with the business and trading community,
including opportunities for consultation when formulating,
implementing and reviewing rules and _ procedures
relating to trade;

Simplification, practicability and efficiency: Rules and
procedures relating to trade to be simplified to ensure that
they are no more burdensome or restrictive than
necessary to achieve their legitimate objectives;

Non-discrimination: Rules and procedures relating to
trade to be applied in a non-discriminatory manner and
be based on market principles;

Consistency and predictability: Rules and procedures
relating to trade to be applied in a consistent, predictable
and uniform manner so as to minimise uncertainty to the
trade and trade related parties. Rules and procedures
relating to trade to provide clear and precise procedural
guidance to the appropriate authorities with standard
policies and operating procedures and be applied in a
non-discretionary manner;

Harmonisation, standardisation and recognition: While
accepting the need of each Member State to regulate or
set rules for legitimate objectives such as protection of
health, safety or public morals and conservation of
exhaustible natural resources, regulations, rules and

34

procedures affecting the acceptance of goods between
Member States to be harmonised as far as possible on
the basis of international standards where appropriate.
The development of mutual recognition arrangements for
standards and conformity assessment results, and
continuing co-operation on_ technical infrastructure
development, are encouraged;

(g) Modernisation and use of new technology: Rules and
procedures relating to trade to be reviewed and updated
if necessary, taking into account changed circumstances,
including new information and new business practices,
and based on the adoption, where appropriate, of modern
techniques and new technology. Where new technology
is used, relevant authorities shall make best efforts to
spread the accompanying benefits to all parties through
ensuring the openness of the information on the adopted
technologies and extending co-operation to authorities of
other economies and the private sector in establishing
inter-operability and/or  inter-connectivity of the
technologies;

(h) Due process: Access to adequate legal appeal
procedures, adding greater certainty to trade
transactions, in accordance with the applicable laws of
Member States; and

(i) Co-operation: Member States shall strive to work closely
with private sector in the introduction of measures
conducive to trade facilitation, including by open channels
of communication and _ co-operation between both
governments and business. Member States _— shall
continue to work in partnership to focus on opportunities
for increased co-operation including integrated technical
assistance and capacity-building; exchanges of best
practices critical to implementing trade facilitation
initiatives and the co-ordination of positions concerning
topics of common interest discussed in the framework of
regional and international organisations.

Article 48
Progress Monitoring of Trade Facilitation

1. Member States, individually and collectively, shall undertake

assessments once in every two (2) years, on implementation of the
trade facilitation measures set out in this Agreement and in the ASEAN

35

Trade Facilitation Work Programme to ensure effective implementation
of trade facilitation measures. For this purpose, an ASEAN Trade
Facilitation Framework shall be agreed by Member States within six (6)
months after entry into force of this Agreement, to serve as a guideline
to further enhance trade facilitation in ASEAN.

2. The ASEAN Work Programme on Trade Facilitation shall be
reviewed based on the results of the regular assessment pursuant to
paragraph 1 of this Article. The ASEAN Trade Facilitation Work
Programme and the ASEAN Trade Facilitation Framework and any
revisions thereto shall be administratively annexed to this Agreement
and serve as an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 49
Establishment of the ASEAN Single Window

Member States shall undertake necessary measures to establish and
operate their respective National Single Windows and the ASEAN
Single Window in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement to
Establish and Implement the ASEAN Single Window and the Protocol
to Establish and Implement the ASEAN Single Window.

Article 50
Implementation Arrangement

1. The progress in the implementation of the ASEAN Work
Programme on Trade Facilitation and the outcomes of its assessment
shall be reported to the AFTA Council. The SEOM, assisted by the
CCA, shall be the main co-ordinator in monitoring the progress of the
implementation of the ASEAN Work Programme on Trade Facilitation,
in close co-ordination with the various ASEAN Committees in charge of
the implementation of the measures under the Work Programme.

2. Each Member State shall establish a Trade Facilitation Co-
ordinating Committee or relevant focal point at the national level.
CHAPTER 6
CUSTOMS

Article 51
Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

36

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

ensure predictability, consistency and transparency in
the application of customs laws of Member States;

promote efficient and economical administration of
customs procedures, and expeditious clearance of goods;

simplify and harmonise customs procedures’ and
practices to the extent possible; and

promote cooperation among the customs authorities.

Article 52
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(d)

(e)

Authorised Economic Operator means a party involved
in the international movement of goods in any function
that has been approved by the customs authorities as
complying with statutory and/or regulatory requirements
of Member States, taking into account international
supply chain security standards;

customs control means measures applied by the
customs authorities to ensure compliance with customs
laws of Member States;

customs procedures means the treatment applied by
the customs authorities of each Member State to goods,
which are subject to customs laws;

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement
on Implementation of Article VII of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, contained in
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

drawback means the amount of import duties and taxes
repaid under the drawback procedure;

drawback procedure means customs procedures which,
when goods are exported, provide for a repayment (total
or partial) to be made in respect of the import duties and
taxes charged on the goods, or on materials contained in
them or consumed in their production;

3/

(g) goods declaration means a statement made in the
manner prescribed by the customs authorities, by which
the persons concerned indicate the customs procedure to
be applied to the goods and furnish the particulars which
the customs authorities require for its application;

(h) repayment means the refund, in whole or in part, of
duties and taxes paid on goods and the remission, in
whole or in part, of duties and taxes where payment has
not been made;

(i) security means that which ensures to the satisfaction of
the customs authorities that an obligation to the customs
authorities will be fulfilled; and

(j) temporary admission means customs procedures under
which certain goods can be brought into a customs
territory conditionally relieved totally or partially from
payment of import duties and taxes; such goods must be
imported for a specific purpose and must be intended for
re-exportation within a specified period and _ without
having undergone any change’ except normal
depreciation due to the use made of them.

Article 53
Scope

This Chapter applies, in accordance with the Member States’
respective laws, regulations and policies, to customs procedures
applied to goods traded among Member States.

Article 54
Customs Procedures and Control

1. Each Member State shall ensure that its customs procedures
and practices are predictable, consistent, transparent and trade
facilitating, including through the expeditious clearance of goods.

2. Customs procedures of Member States shall, where possible
and to the extent permitted by their respective customs law, conform to
standards and recommended practices of the World Customs
Organisation and other international organisations as relevant to
customs.

38

3. The customs authorities of each Member State shall review its
customs procedures with a view to their simplification to facilitate trade.

4, Customs control shall be limited to that which is necessary to
ensure compliance with customs laws of Member States.

Article 55
Pre-arrival Documentation

Member States shall endeavour to make provision for the lodging and
registering or checking of the goods declaration and its supporting
documents prior to the arrival of the goods.

Article 56
Risk Management

Member States shall use risk management to determine control
measures with the view to facilitate customs clearance and release of
goods.

Article 57
Customs Valuation

1. For the purposes of determining the customs value of goods
traded between and among the Member States, provisions of Part | of
Customs Valuation Agreement, shall apply mutatis mutandis’.

2. Member States shall harmonise, to the extent possible,
administrative procedures and practices in the assessment of value of
goods for customs purposes.

Article 58
Application of Information Technology

Member States, where applicable, shall apply information technology in
customs operations based on internationally accepted standards for
expeditious customs clearance and release of goods.

” In the case of Cambodia, the Agreement on Customs Valuation, as implemented in
accordance with the provision of the protocol on the Accession of the Kingdom of
Cambodia to the WTO, shall apply mutatis mutandis.

39

Article 59
Authorised Economic Operators

1. Member States shall endeavour to establish the programme of
Authorised Economic Operators (AEO) to promote informed
compliance and efficiency of customs control.

2. Member States shall endeavour to work towards mutual
recognition of AEO.

Article 60
Repayment, Drawback and Security

1. Decisions on claims for repayment shall be reached, and
notified in writing to the persons concerned, without undue delay, and
repayment of amounts overcharged shall be made as soon as possible
after the verification of claims.

2. Drawback shall be paid as soon as possible after the verification
of claims.
3. Where security has been furnished, it shall be discharged as

soon as possible after the customs authorities are satisfied that the
obligations under which the security was required have been duly
fulfilled.

Article 61
Post Clearance Audit

Member States shall establish and operate Post Clearance Audit
(PCA) for expeditious customs clearance and enhanced customs
control.

Article 62
Advance Rulings

1. Each Member State, through its customs authorities and/or
other relevant authorities, shall, to the extent permitted by its respective
laws, regulations and administrative determinations, provide in writing
advance rulings on the application of a person described in paragraph
2(a) of this Article, in respect of the tariff classification, questions
arising from the application of the principles of Customs Valuation
Agreement and/or origin of goods.

2. Where available, each Member State shall adopt or maintain
procedures for advance rulings, which shall:

40

(a) provide that an importer in its territory or an exporter or
producer in the territory of another Member State may
apply for an advance ruling before the importation of
goods in question;

(b) require that an applicant for an advance ruling provide a
detailed description of the goods and all relevant
information needed to process an application for an
advance ruling;

(Cc) provide that its customs authorities may, at any time
during the course of evaluation of an application for an
advance ruling, request that the applicant provide
additional information within a specified period;

(d) provide that any advance ruling be based on the facts
and circumstances presented by the applicant, and any
other relevant information in the possession of the
decision-maker; and

(e) provide that an advance ruling be issued to the applicant
expeditiously, within the period specified in each Member
State’s respective laws, regulations or administrative
determinations.

3. A Member State may reject requests for an advance ruling
where the additional information requested in accordance with
paragraph 2(c) of this Article is not provided within a specified time.

4. Subject to paragraphs 1 and 5 of this Article and where
available, each Member State shall apply an advance ruling to all
importations of goods described in that ruling imported into its territory
for three (3) years from the date of that ruling, or such other period as
specified in that Member State's respective laws, regulations or
administrative determinations.

5. A Member State may modify or revoke an advance ruling upon a
determination that the ruling was based on an error of fact or law
(including human error), the information provided is false or inaccurate,
there is a change in its law consistent with this Agreement, or there is a
change in a material fact, or circumstances on which the ruling was
based.

6. Where an importer claims that the treatment accorded to an
imported good should be governed by an advance ruling, the customs

41

authorities may evaluate whether the facts and circumstances of the
importation are consistent with the facts and circumstances upon which
an advance ruling was based.

Article 63
Temporary Admission

Member States shall facilitate movement of goods under temporary
admission to the greatest extent possible.

Article 64
Customs Co-operation

To the extent permitted by their laws, Member States may, as deemed
appropriate, assist each other on customs matters.

Article 65
Transparency

1. Member States will facilitate the timely publication,
dissemination of statutory and regulatory information, decisions and
rulings on customs matters.

2. Each Member State shall publish on the internet and/or in print
form all statutory and regulatory provisions and any customs
administrative procedures applicable or enforceable by its customs
administration, except law enforcement procedures and_ internal
operational guidelines.

Article 66
Enquiry Points

Each Member State shall designate one (1) or more enquiry points to
address enquiries from interested persons concerning customs
matters, and shall make available on the internet and/or in print form
information concerning procedures for making such enquiries.

Article 67
Consultation

42

The customs authorities of Member States will encourage consultation
with each other regarding customs issues that affect goods traded
between and among Member States.

Article 68
Confidentiality

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require any
Member State to furnish or allow access to confidential information
pursuant to this Chapter the disclosure of which it considers would:

(a) be contrary to the public interest as determined by its
laws;

(b) be contrary to any of its laws, including but not limited, to
those protecting personal privacy or the financial affairs
and accounts of individual customers of financial
institutions;

(Cc) impede law enforcement; or

(d) prejudice legitimate commercial interests, which may
include competitive position of particular enterprises,
public or private.

2. Where a Member State provides information to another Member
State in accordance with this Chapter and designates the information
as confidential, the Member State receiving the information § shall
maintain the confidentiality of the information, use it only for the
purposes specified by the Member State providing the information, and
not disclose it without the specific written permission of the Member
State providing the information.

Article 69
Review and Appeal

1. Each Member State shall ensure that any person, in its territory,
being aggrieved by any customs decision pertinent to this Agreement
have access to administrative review within the customs authorities
that issued the decision subject to review or, where applicable, by the
higher authority supervising the administration and/or judicial review of
the determination taken at the final level of administrative review, in
accordance with the Member State's law.

2. The decision on appeal shall be given to the appellant and the
reasons for such decision shall be provided in writing.

43

Article 70
Implementation and Institutional Arrangements

The ASEAN Directors-General of Customs, supported by customs
working bodies, shall be responsible to implement the provisions of this
Chapter and any other provisions relevant to customs in_ this
Agreement.

CHAPTER 7
STANDARDS, TECHNICAL REGULATIONS AND CONFORMITY
ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES

Article 71
Objective

The objective of this Chapter is to establish provisions on standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures to ensure
that these do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade in establishing
ASEAN as a single market and production base, and at the same time
ensure that the legitimate objectives of Member States are met.

Article 72
Terms and Definitions

General terms concerning standardisation and conformity assessment
used in this Chapter have the meaning given to them in the definitions
contained in the appropriate editions of ISO/ IEC Guide 2 and ISO/ IEC
17000 of the International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) and
the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) as cited in the
ASEAN Framework Agreement on Mutual Recognition Arrangements
and the relevant ASEAN Sectoral Mutual Recognition Arrangements.

Article 73
General Provisions

1. Member States reaffirm and are committed to abide by the rights

and obligations under the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade
contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement.

44

2. Member States shall take any of the following possible
measures or their combinations to mitigate, if not totally eliminate,
unnecessary technical barriers to trade:

(a) harmonise national standards with relevant international
standards and practices;

(6) promote mutual recognition of conformity assessment
results among Member States;

(Cc) develop and implement ASEAN _ Sectoral Mutual
Recognition Arrangements and develop ASEAN
Harmonised Regulatory Regimes in the regulated areas
where applicable; and

(d) | encourage the co-operation among National Accreditation
Bodies and National Metrology Institutes (NMIs) including
relevant legal metrology authorities in ASEAN to facilitate
the implementation of Mutual Recognition Arrangements
(MRAs) in regulated and non-regulated sectors.

3. To facilitate the free movement of goods within ASEAN, Member
States shall develop and implement a Marking Scheme, where
appropriate, for products covered under the ASEAN Harmonised
Regulatory Regimes or Directives.

Article 74
Standards

1. Each Member State undertakes that its national standards
authorities accept and follow the Code of Good Practice for the
Preparation, Adoption and Application of Standards as provided for in
Annex 3 of the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade as contained
in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement.

2. In harmonising national standards, Member States shall, as the
first and preferred option, adopt the relevant international standards
when preparing new national standards or revising existing standards.
Where international standards are not available, national standards
shall be aligned among Member States.

3. Member States are encouraged to actively participate in the
development of international standards, particularly in those sectors
that have trade potential for ASEAN.

4. Harmonisation of the existing national standards and adoption of

45

international standards into new national standards should be based on
“Adoption of International Standards as Regional or National
Standards”, as contained in the ISO/IEC Guide 21 or its latest edition.

5. Whenever modifications of contents and structure of the relevant
international standards are necessary, Member States shall ensure an
easy comparison of the contents and structure of their national
standards with the referenced international standards and provide
information to explain the reason(s) for such modifications.

6. Member States shall ensure that:

(a) the modifications of contents of international standards
are not prepared and adopted with a view to, or with the
effect of, creating unnecessary technical barriers to
trade; and

(b) the modifications of contents shall not be more restrictive
than necessary.

Article 75
Technical Regulations
1. In adopting technical regulations, Member States shall ensure
that:

(a) these are not adopted with a view, to or with the effect of,
creating technical barriers to trade;

(b) these are based on international or national standards
that are harmonised to international standards, except
where legitimate reasons for deviations exist;

(Cc) alternative means that are least trade restrictive to
achieve the desired objectives are considered before a
decision is taken on the adoption of technical regulations;

(d) the adoption of prescriptive standards is avoided to
ensure that unnecessary obstacles to trade are not
introduced, to enhance fair competition in the market or
that it does not lead to a reduction of business flexibility;
and

(e) treatment accorded to products imported from Member

States is no less favourable than that accorded to like
products of national origin and to like products originating

46

from any other Member State.

2. Member States shall ensure that only those parts of a standard
that represent minimum requirements to fulfil the desired objectives are
referred to in the technical regulations.

3. Member States shall also ensure that, wherever applicable, the
preparation, adoption and application of technical regulations are to
facilitate the implementation of the respective ASEAN Sectoral Mutual
Recognition Arrangements.

4. Whenever the need for technical regulations is urgent for
overcoming problems that arise or threaten to arise within the territory
of a Member State and the available time does not allow such Member
State to harmonise the relevant national standards, that Member State
shall consider using the appropriate international standards or the
relevant parts of them as the first alternative.

5. Member States shall comply with the notification procedures as
stipulated in Article 11. However, in the case of technical regulations
under this Article, other Member States shall present their comments, if
any, within sixty (60) days of the notification. Member States shall,
upon request, provide to other Member States the draft of the technical
regulation and other information regarding the deviations from the
relevant international standards and the applicable pre-market
conformity assessment procedure.

6. Except in urgent circumstances, Member States shall allow at
least six (6) months between the publication of technical regulations
and their entry into force in order to provide sufficient time for
producers in exporting Member States to adapt their products or
methods of production to the requirements of importing Member
States.

Article 76
Conformity Assessment Procedures

1. Member States shall ensure that conformity assessment
procedures are not prepared, adopted or applied with a view to, or with
the effect of, creating unnecessary technical barriers to trade and that
conformity assessment procedures that have to be complied with by
suppliers of products originating in the territories of other Member
States are not more stringent than those accorded to suppliers of like
products of national origin.

2. Member States shall adopt conformity assessment procedures

47

that are consistent with international standards and practices and
wherever such procedures cannot be achieved because of differences
in legitimate objectives, the differences of conformity assessment
procedures shall be minimised as far as possible.

3. Member States shall develop and implement ASEAN Sectoral
Mutual Recognition Arrangement in the regulated areas, where
appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the ASEAN
Framework Agreement on Mutual Recognition Arrangements.

4. Member States shall accept the results of conformity
assessment produced by conformity assessment bodies designated by
other Member States in accordance with the provisions of the ASEAN
Framework Agreement on Mutual Recognition Arrangements and the
provisions of the respective ASEAN Sectoral Mutual Recognition
Arrangements in all regulated areas.

5. Member States shall establish co-operation among National
Accreditation Bodies and National Metrology Institutes (NMIs),
including legal metrology in ASEAN to facilitate the implementation of
MRAs in regulated and non-regulated sectors.

Article 77
Post Market Surveillance

1. Member States shall establish post market surveillance systems
to complement the implementation of the ASEAN Sectoral Mutual
Recognition Arrangements and ASEAN Harmonised Regulatory
Regimes and/or Directives.

2. The relevant authority that undertakes the post market
surveillance system of the Member States shall take the necessary
actions to ensure compliance of products placed in the market with the
applicable ASEAN Sectoral Mutual Recognition Arrangements and
ASEAN Harmonised Regulatory Regimes and/or Directives.

3. Member States should ensure that the necessary laws and
technical infrastructure are in place to support post market surveillance
systems.

4, The effectiveness of the post market surveillance systems shall
be further enhanced through the establishment of Alert Systems
among Member States.

48

Article 78
Implementation

1. Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure
implementation of all the ASEAN Sectoral Mutual Recognition
Arrangements, ASEAN Harmonised Regulatory Regimes and the
relevant provisions of this Agreement within the time frame stipulated in
the aforesaid agreements and to ensure compliance with aforesaid
harmonised requirements.

2. The following instruments, and any future instruments agreed by
Member States to implement the provisions of this Agreement, shall
form an integral part of this Agreement:

(a) ASEAN Framework Agreement on Mutual Recognition
Arrangements;

(b) ASEAN Sectoral Mutual Recognition Arrangement for
Electrical and Electronic Equipment;

(Cc) Agreement on the ASEAN Harmonised Electrical and
Electronic Equipment (EEE) Regulatory Regime; and

(d) Agreement on the ASEAN Harmonised Cosmetic
Regulatory Scheme.

3. The ASEAN Consultative Committee for Standards and Quality
(ACCSQ) shall be responsible for:

a) identifying and initiating sectoral MRAs;

b) monitoring the effective implementation of the relevant
provisions of this Agreement in respect of standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures;

Cc) providing support to the respective Joint Sectoral
Committees when required; and

d) collaborating with the ASEAN Secretariat to provide
regular feedback on the implementation of this
Agreement.

4. The ACCSQ shall provide support and co-operation under the

relevant ASEAN Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with Dialogue
Partners, including capacity building and institutional strengthening

49

programmes for Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity
Assessment Procedures Chapters in such ASEAN FTAs.

5. The ACCSQ shall take the necessary actions to ensure effective
implementation of the ASEAN _ Sectoral Mutual Recognition
Arrangements and ASEAN Harmonised Regulatory Regimes.

CHAPTER 8
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

Article 79
Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) facilitate trade between and among Member States while
protecting human, animal or plant life or health in each
Member State;

(b) provide a framework and guidelines on requirements in
the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures
among Member States, particularly to achieve
commitments set forth in the ASEAN _ Economic
Community Blueprint;

(Cc) strengthen co-operation among Member States _ in
protecting human, animal or plant life or health; and

(d) facilitate and strengthen implementation of this Chapter in
accordance with the principles and disciplines in the
Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures contained in Annex 1A to the
WTO Agreement and this Agreement.

Article 80
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) international standards, guidelines and

recommendations shall have the same meaning as in
Annex A of paragraph 3 to the SPS Agreement;

50

(bo) sanitary or phytosanitary measures shall have the
same meaning as in Annex A of paragraph 1 to the SPS
Agreement; and

(C) SPS Agreement means the Agreement on_ the
Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement.

Article 81
General Provisions and Obligations

1. The provisions of this Chapter apply to all sanitary and
phytosanitary measures of a Member State that may, directly or
indirectly, affect trade between and among Member States.

2. Member States affirm their rights and obligations with respect to
each other under the SPS Agreement.

3. Each Member State commits to apply the principles of the SPS
Agreement in the development, application or recognition of any
sanitary or phytosanitary measures with the intent to facilitate trade
between and among Member States while protecting human, animal or
plant life or health in each Member State.

4, In the implementation of their sanitary or phytosanitary
measures, Member States agree to be guided, where applicable, by
relevant international standards, guidelines and recommendations
developed by international organisations such as, the Codex
Alimentarius Commission (Codex), the World Organisation for Animal
Health (OIE), the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) and
ASEAN.

5. Member States hereby agree that the laws, regulations, and
procedures for application of SPS measures in their respective
territories shall be listed in Annex 9, which form an integral part of this
Agreement. Member States hereby agree to ensure that their
respective national sanitary and phytosanitary laws, regulations and
procedures as listed in Annex 9 are readily available and accessible to
any interested Member States.

6. Any change to national sanitary and phytosanitary laws,
regulations and procedures shall be subject to Article 11.

51

Article 82

Implementation and Institutional Arrangements

1. For effective implementation of this Chapter, an ASEAN
Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (AC-SPS) shall be
established to conduct committee meetings at least once a year among
Member States.

2. The functions of the AC-SPS shall be to:

(a)

(b)

(d)

facilitate exchange of information on such matters as
occurrences of sanitary or phytosanitary incidents in the
Member States and non-Member States, and change or
introduction of sanitary and_ phytosanitary-related
regulations and standards of the Member States , which
may, directly or indirectly, affect trade between and
among Member States;

facilitate co-operation in the area of sanitary or
phytosanitary measures including capacity building,
technical assistance and exchange of experts, subject to
the availability of appropriated funds and the applicable
laws and regulations of each Member State;

endeavour to resolve sanitary and phytosanitary matters
with a view to facilitate trade between and among
Member States. The AC-SPS may establish ad hoc task
force to undertake science-based consultations to identify
and address specific issues that may arise from the
application of sanitary or phytosanitary measures; and

submit regular reports of developments and
recommendations in the implementation of this Chapter
to the AFTA Council, through SEOM for further action.

3. Each Member State shall establish a contact point for effective
communication and co-operation. The list of respective designated
contact points appears in Annex 10.

4. Each Member State shall ensure the information in Annex 10 is

updated.

Article 83
Notification under Emergency Situation

52

1. Each Member State acknowledges the value of exchanging
information, particularly in an emergency situation on food safety crisis,
interception, control of pests and/or disease outbreaks and its sanitary
or phytosanitary measures.

2. Member States shall immediately notify all contact points and the
ASEAN Secretariat should the following situations occur:

(a) in case of food safety crisis, pest or disease outbreaks;
and

(b) provisional sanitary or phytosanitary measures against or
affecting the exports of the other Member States are
considered necessary to protect the human, animal or
plant life or health of the importing Member State.

3. The exporting Member State should, to the extent possible,
endeavour to provide information to the importing Member State if the
exporting Member State identifies that an export consignment which
may be associated with a significant sanitary or phytosanitary risk has
been exported.

Article 84
Equivalence

1. Each Member State shall initiate and further strengthen co-
operation on equivalence in accordance with the SPS Agreement and
relevant international standards, guidelines and recommendations, in
order to facilitate trade between and among the Member States.

2. To facilitate trade, Member States may develop equivalence
arrangements and recommend equivalence decisions, in particular in
accordance with Article 4 of the SPS Agreement and with the guidance
provided by the relevant international and regional standard setting
bodies namely Codex, OIE, IPPC and ASEAN and by the Committee
on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures established in accordance
with Article 12 of the SPS Agreement.

3. Each Member State shall, upon request, enter into consultations
with the aim of achieving bilateral and/or regional recognition
arrangements of the equivalence of specified sanitary or phytosanitary
measures.

53

Article 85
Co-operation

1. Each Member State shall explore opportunities for further co-
operation, technical assistance, collaboration and_ information
exchange with other Member States on sanitary and phytosanitary
matters of mutual interest consistent with the objectives of this Chapter
and the commitments set forth in the ASEAN Economic Community
Blueprint.

2. Member States shall further strengthen co-operation for the
control and eradication of pests and disease outbreaks, and other
emergency cases related to sanitary or phytosanitary measures as well
as to assist other Member States to comply with SPS requirements.

3. In implementing the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article,
Member States shall co-ordinate their undertakings with the activities
conducted in the regional and multilateral context, with the objectives of
avoiding unnecessary duplication and maximising efficiency of efforts
of the Member States in this field.

4. Any two (2) Member States may, by mutual agreement, co-
operate on adaptation to regional conditions including the concept of
pests and disease free areas and areas of low pests or disease
prevalence, in accordance with the SPS Agreement and relevant
international standards, guidelines and recommendations, in order to
facilitate trade between the Member States.

CHAPTER 9
TRADE REMEDY MEASURES

Article 86
Safeguard Measures

Each Member State which is a WTO member retains its rights and
obligations under Article XIX of GATT 1994, and the Agreement on
Safeguards or Article 5 of the Agreement on Agriculture.

Article 87
Anti-dumping and Countervailing Duties

1. Member States affirm their rights and obligations with respect to
each other relating to the application of anti-dumping under Article VI of
GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 as contained in Annex
1A to the WTO Agreement.

54

2. Member States affirm their rights and obligations with respect to
each other relating to subsidies and countervailing measures under
Article XVI of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures as contained in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement.

CHAPTER 10
INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 88
Advisory and Consultative Mechanism

The ASEAN Consultations to Solve Trade and Investment Issues
(ACT) and the ASEAN Compliance Monitoring Body (ACB) as
contained in the Declaration on ASEAN Concord II (Bali Concord II)
may be invoked to settle disputes that may arise from this Agreement.
Any Member State who does not wish to avail of the ACT/ACB may
resort to the mechanism provided in the ASEAN Protocol on Enhanced
Dispute Settlement Mechanism.

Article 89
Dispute Settlement

The ASEAN Protocol on Enhanced Dispute Settlement Mechanism,
signed on 29 November 2004 in Vientiane, Lao PDR and amendments
thereto, shall apply in relation to any dispute arising from, or any
difference between Member States concerning the interpretation or
application of this Agreement.

Article 90
Institutional Arrangements

1. The ASEAN Economic Ministers (AEM) shall, for the purposes
of this Agreement, establish an ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA)
Council comprising one (1) ministerial-level nominee from each
Member State and the Secretary-General of ASEAN. In the
performance of its functions, the AFTA Council shall also be supported
by the Senior Economic Officials' Meeting (SEOM). In the fulfilment of
its functions, the SEOM may establish bodies, as appropriate, to assist
them such as the Coordinating Committee on the implementation of
ATIGA (CCA). The SEOM, assisted by the CCA, shall ensure the
effective implementation of this Agreement and, shall coordinate and
be supported by technical bodies and committees under this
Agreement.

99

2. Each Member State shall establish a National AFTA Unit, which
shall serve a national focal point for the coordination of the
implementation of this Agreement.

3. The ASEAN Secretariat shall:

(a) provide support to the AEM and AFTA Council in
supervising, co-ordinating and reviewing the
implementation of this Agreement as well as assistance
in all related matters; and

(b) monitor and regularly report to the AFTA Council on the
progress in the implementation of this Agreement.

CHAPTER 11
FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 91
Relation to Other Agreements

1. Subject to paragraph 2 of this Article, all ASEAN economic
agreements that exist before the entry into force of ATIGA shall
continue to be valid.

2. Member States shall agree on the list of agreements to be
superseded within six (6) months from the date of entry into force and
such list shall be administratively annexed to this Agreement and serve
as an integral part of this Agreement.

3. In case of inconsistency between this Agreement and any
ASEAN economic agreements that are not superseded under
paragraph 2 of this Article, this Agreement shall prevail.

Article 92
Amended or Successor International Agreements

If any international agreement or a provision therein referred to, or
incorporated into, this Agreement, and such agreement or provision is
amended, the Member States shall consult on whether it is necessary
to amend this Agreement, unless this Agreement provides otherwise.

Article 93
Annexes, Attachments and Future Instruments

56

1. The Annexes and Attachments to this Agreement shall form an
integral part of this Agreement.

2. Member States may adopt legal instruments in the future
pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement. Upon their respective
entry into force, such instruments shall form part of this Agreement.

Article 94
Amendments

1. The provisions of this Agreement may be modified through
amendments mutually agreed upon in writing by the Member States.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this Article, the Annexes and
Attachments to this Agreement may be modified through amendments
endorsed by the AFTA Council. The said amendments shall be
administratively annexed to this Agreement and serve as an integral
part of this Agreement.
Article 95
Review

The AFTA Council or their designated representatives shall meet within
one (1) year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement and then
every two (2) years or otherwise as appropriate to review this
Agreement for the purpose of fulfilling the objective of this Agreement.

Article 96
Entry into Force

1. This Agreement shall be signed by the ASEAN Economic
Ministers.

2. This Agreement shall enter into force, after all Member States
have notified or, where necessary, deposited instruments of
ratifications with the Secretary-General of ASEAN upon completion of
their internal procedures, which shall not take more than one hundred
and eighty (180) days after the signing of this Agreement.

3. The Secretary-General of ASEAN shall promptly notify all
Member States of the notifications or deposit of each instrument of
ratification referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article.

Article 97
Reservations

o/

No reservations shall be made with respect to any of the provisions of
this Agreement.

Article 98
Depositary

This Agreement shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of
ASEAN who shall promptly furnish a certified copy thereof to each
Member State.

---

ASEAN TRADE IN SERVICES AGREEMENT

NOTING the ASEAN Framework Agreement on Services
Signed by the ASEAN Economic Ministers (AEM) on 15
December 1995 in Bangkok, Thailand (hereinafter referred to
as “AFAS”) and its subsequent Implementing Protocols, the
objectives of which are to enhance cooperation in services
amongst Member States, to eliminate substantially all
restrictions to trade in services amongst Member States, and
to liberalise trade in services by expanding the depth and
scope of liberalisation beyond those undertaken by Member
States under the General Agreement on Trade in Services
(GATS);

TAKING INTO ACCOUNT the mandate of the 7% ASEAN
Economic Community Council held on 2 April 2012 in Phnom
Penh, Cambodia to review and enhance the existing AFAS, to
enhance ASEAN’s economic and sectoral integration in the
same vein that ASEAN has transformed the Framework
Agreement on the ASEAN Investment Area and the ASEAN
Agreement for the Promotion and Protection of Investments,
and the Agreement on the Common Effective Preferential
Tariff Scheme for the ASEAN Free Trade Area into the
ASEAN Comprehensive Investment Agreement (ACIA) and
the ASEAN Trade In Goods Agreement, respectively;

ALSO TAKING INTO ACCOUNT the guiding principles and
the objectives of an enhanced ASEAN Trade in Services
Agreement (ATISA) adopted at the 44° AEM Meeting held on
28 August 2012 in Siem Reap, Cambodia;

NOTING the decision of the 48° AEM Meeting held on 3
August 2016 in Vientiane, Lao PDR instructing officials to
explore possible approaches of negative list under the ATISA,
taking into account the mandate of the ASEAN Economic
Community Blueprint 2025 and the on-going developments of
the negotiations under other fora;

RECOGNISING that intra-ASEAN economic cooperation will
secure a liberal trading framework for trade in services which
would strengthen and enhance trade in services amongst
Member States; and

REITERATING our commitments to the rules and principles
of the GATS and noting that Article V of GATS permits the
liberalisation of trade in services between or amongst the
parties to an economic integration agreement,

HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:

SECTION |
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
Objectives
The objectives of this Agreement are to:

(a) strengthen economic linkages and provide greater
opportunities for economic development;

1.

2.

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

increase trade and investment in the area of services
and create larger markets and greater economies of
scale;

reduce barriers to trade and investment in services
and create a predictable business environment;

strengthen economic relations between Member
States through: inter alia promoting and facilitating
utilisation of the greater opportunities provided by the
Agreement; promoting regulatory cooperation;
developing co-operation in the field of human
resource development; and_ increasing’ the
participation of small and medium enterprises in
trade and investment activities; and

narrow development gaps between Member States
to achieve a more equitable, balanced and
sustainable socio-economic development.

Article 2
Scope

This Agreement applies to measures by Member States
affecting trade in services.

This Agreement shall not apply to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

services supplied in the exercise of governmental
authority within the territory of each Member State;

laws, regulations or requirements governing the
procurement by governmental agencies of services
purchased for governmental purposes and not with a
view to commercial resale or with a view to use in the
supply of services for commercial sale;

cabotage;

(d) subsidies and grants; and

(e) air traffic rights, however granted, or services directly
related to the exercise of traffic rights; and

(f) air transport services except air transport ancillary
services as set out in Annex on Air Transport
Ancillary Services.

Article 3
Relation to the ASEAN Comprehensive Investment
Agreement

1. The ACIA signed on 26 February 2009 in Cha-am,
Thailand, and its subsequent amendments, does not apply to
measures adopted or maintained by a Member State covered
by this Agreement.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, for the purpose of
protection of investment with respect to the commercial
presence mode of service supply Article 11 (Treatment of
Investment), Article 12 (Compensation in Cases of Strife),
Article 13 (Transfers), Article 14 (Expropriation and
Compensation), Article 15 (Subrogation) and Section B
(Investment Dispute between an Investor and a Member
State) of the ACIA shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to measures
affecting the supply of a service by a service supplier of a
Member State through commercial presence in the territory of
another member State but only to the extent that they relate
to an investment and obligation under the ACIA.

3. For the avoidance of doubt, Article 11 (Treatment of
Investment), Article 12 (Compensation in Cases of Strife),
Article 13 (Transfers), Article 14 (Expropriation and
Compensation), Article 15 (Subrogation) and Section B
(Investment Dispute between an Investor and a Member
State) of the ACIA, are not incorporated into this Agreement.

4. For greater certainty, any breach of any provision in this
Agreement shall not be subject to any dispute settlement
mechanism under ACIA, including but not limited to Investor
State Dispute Settlement mechanism.

Article 4
Relation to the ASEAN Agreement on the Movement of
Natural Persons

1. The ASEAN Agreement on the Movement of Natural
Persons signed on 19 November 2012 in Phnom Penh,
Cambodia (hereinafter referred to as “ASEAN Agreement on
MNP”), shall apply to measures by a Member State affecting
the supply of a service through presence of natural persons of
a Member State in the territory of any other Member States,
and shall prevail in the event of any inconsistency with this
Agreement.

2. With regard to the provisions under Sections II and III of
this Agreement, the ASEAN Agreement on MNP shall prevail
and apply exclusively to measures affecting the supply of a
service through presence of natural persons of a Member
State in the territory of any other Member States.

Article 5
Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement, the term:

(a) “a service supplied in the exercise of
governmental authority” means any service which
is supplied neither on a commercial basis, nor in
competition with one or more service suppliers;

(b) “commercial presence” means any type of business
or professional establishment, including through:

(c)

(d)

(i) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a
juridical person; or

(ii) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a
representative office,

within the territory of a Member State for the purpose
of supplying a service;

“computing facilities” means computer servers and
storage devices for processing or storing information
for commercial use;

“direct taxes” comprises all taxes on total income,
on total capital or on elements of income or of capital,
including taxes on gains from the alienation of
property, taxes on estates, inheritances and gifts,
and taxes on the total amounts of wages or salaries
paid by enterprises, as well as taxes on capital
appreciation;

‘final AFAS Packages” means the tenth package of
commitments made by Member States under the
AFAS as signed by the AEM, and the last package of
commitments signed by ASEAN Finance Ministers
(AFM) and ASEAN Transport Ministers (ATM) prior
to entry into force of the Schedules of Non-
Conforming-Measures pursuant to Article 11 (Non-
Conforming Measures).

“GATS” means the General Agreement on Trade in
Services;

“investment” means investment as defined under
paragraph (c) of Article 4 (Definitions) of the ACIA, as
may be amended;

(h)

(k)

“investor” means a natural person of a Member
State or a juridical person of a Member State that is
making, or has made an investment in the territory of
any other Member State;

‘juridical person” means any legal entity duly
constituted or otherwise organised under applicable
law of a Member State, whether for profit or
otherwise, and_ whether privately-owned or
governmentally-owned, including any corporation,
trust, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship
or, association;

‘juridical person of another Member State” means
a juridical person which is either:

(i) constituted or otherwise organised under the law
of that other Member State, and is engaged in
substantive business operations in the territory
of that Member State or any other Member State;
or

(ii) in the case of the supply of a service through
commercial presence, owned or controlled by:

(1) natural persons of that Member State; or

(2) juridical persons of that other Member State
identified under subparagraph (i);

A juridical person is:

(i) “owned” by persons of a Member State if more
than 50 per cent of the equity interest in it is
beneficially owned by persons of that Member
State;

(ii) “controlled” by persons of a Member State if
such persons have the power to name a majority

of its directors or otherwise to legally direct its
actions; and

(iii) “affiliated” with another person when it controls,
or is controlled by, that other person; or when it
and the other person are both controlled by the
same person.

(1) “measure” means any measure by a Member State,
whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,
procedure, decision, administrative action, or any
other form’:

(m) “measures by a Member State” means measures
taken by:

(i) central, regional or local governments and
authorities of a Member State; and

(ii) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of
powers delegated by central, regional or local
governments or authorities of a Member State;

(n) “measures by a Member State affecting trade in
services” includes measures in respect of:

(i) the purchase, payment or use of a service;

(ii) the access to and use of, in connection with the
supply of a service, services which are required
by those Member States to be offered to the
public generally; and

(iii) the presence, including commercial presence, of

persons of a Member State for the supply of a
service in the territory of another Member State;

1 “measure” shall include taxation measures to the extent covered by the GATS.

(0)

(p)

(q)

(r)

(s)

“monopoly supplier of a service” means any
person, public or private, which in the relevant market
of the territory of a Member State is authorised or
established formally or in effect by that Member State
as the sole supplier of that service;

“natural person of another Member State” means
a natural person who under the law of that Member
State:

(i) is a national or citizen of that Member State; or

(ii) has the right of permanent residence in that
Member State, where both that Member State
and the Member State in which the person
supplies services recognise permanent
residents and accord substantially the same
treatment to their respective permanent
residents as they accord to their respective
nationals in respect of measures affecting trade
in services.

“person” means either a natural person or a juridical
person;

“sector” of a service means:

(i) with reference to a specific commitment, one or
more, or all, subsectors of that service, as
specified in a Member State’s Schedule;

(ii) otherwise, the whole of that service sector,
including all of its subsectors;

“services” includes any service in any sector except
services supplied in the exercise of governmental
authority;

(t) “service consumer” means any person _ that
receives or uSes a Service;

(u) “service of another Member State” means a
service which is supplied:

(i) from or in the territory of that other Member
State, or in the case of maritime transport, by a
vessel registered under the laws of that other
Member State, or by a person of that other
Member State which supplies the service
through the operation of a vessel and/or its use
in whole or in part; or

(ii) in the case of the supply of a service through
commercial presence or through the presence of
natural persons, by a service supplier of that
other Member State;

(v) “service supplier” means any person that supplies
a service’;

(w) “supply of a service” includes the production,
distribution, marketing, sale and delivery of a service;

(x) “trade in services” means the supply of a service:

(i) from the territory of a Member State into the
territory of any other Member State (“cross-
border supply’);

2 Where the service is not supplied directly by a juridical person but through other forms
of commercial presence such as a branch or a representative office, the service
supplier (i.e. the juridical person) shall, nonetheless, through such presence be
accorded the treatment provided for service suppliers under this Agreement. Such
treatment shall be extended to the presence through which the service is supplied and
need not be extended to any other parts of the supplier located outside the territory
where the service is supplied.

10

(ii) in the territory of a Member State to the service
consumer of any other Member State
(“consumption abroad”):

(ili) by a service supplier of a Member State, through
commercial presence in the territory of any other
Member State (“commercial presence’);

(iv) by a service supplier of a Member State, through
presence of natural persons of a Member State
in the territory of any other Member State
(“presence of natural persons”); and

(y) “traffic rights” means the rights for scheduled and
non-scheduled services to operate and/or to carry
passengers, cargo and mail for remuneration or hire
from, to, within, or over the territory of a Member
State, including points to be served, routes to be
operated, types of traffic to be carried, capacity to be
provided, tariffs to be charged and their conditions,
and criteria for designation of airlines, including such
criteria as number, ownership and control.

SECTION Il
CORE OBLIGATIONS AND DISCIPLINES

Article 6
National Treatment
1. Each Member State shall accord to services and service

suppliers of another Member State, in respect of all measures
affecting the supply of services, treatment no less favourable

11

than that it accords in like circumstances?, to its own services
and service suppliers.*

2. A Member State may meet the requirement of paragraph
1 by according to services and service suppliers of any other
Member State, either formally identical treatment or formally
different treatment to that it accords to its own like services
and service suppliers.

3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be
considered to be less favourable if it modifies the conditions
of competition in favour of services or service suppliers of the
Member State compared to like services or service suppliers
of any other Member State.

Article 7
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

1. Each Member State shall accord to service suppliers of
another Member State treatment no less favourable than that
it accords, in like circumstances, to service suppliers of any
other Member State or a non-Member State.

2. Each Member State shall accord to services supplied by
another Member State treatment no less favourable than that
it accords, in like circumstances, to services supplied in its
territory by service suppliers of any other Member State or a
non-Member State.

3. For greater certainty, in relation to services falling within
the scope of this Agreement, any preferential treatment

3 For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under
Article 6 (National Treatment) or Article 7 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) depends
on the totality of the circumstances, including whether the relevant treatment
distinguishes between services or service suppliers on the basis of legitimate public
welfare objectives.

4 Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require any Member State to compensate
for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of
the relevant services or service suppliers.

12

granted by a Member State to service suppliers of any other
Member State or a non-Member State and to their services,
under future agreements or arrangements to which a Member
State is a party shall be extended on a Most-Favoured-Nation
basis to all Member States. Agreements and arrangements
concluded or signed before the signing of ATISA, and their
future amendments, shall not be subject to this Article.

4. The treatment referred to in paragraphs 1 to 3 shall not
apply to financial services, and Article 11 (Most-Favoured-
Nation Treatment) of the Annex on Financial Services shall
apply to financial services.

5. The provisions of this Agreement shall not be construed
to prevent any Member State from conferring or according
advantages to adjacent countries in order to facilitate
exchanges limited to contiguous frontier zones of services that
are both locally produced and consumed.

6. Notwithstanding Paragraphs 1 to 5 above, two or more
Member States may conduct negotiations and agree to
liberalise trade in services for specific sectors or sub-sectors
(‘the participating Member States”). Any extension of such
preferential treatment to the remaining Member States on a
most-favoured-nation basis shall be voluntary on the part of
the participating Member States.

7. The participating Member States shall keep the remaining
Member States informed through the ASEAN Secretariat of
the progress or result of the negotiations. Member States
wishing to join any on-going negotiations among the
participating Member States may do so in consultation with
the participating Member States.

8. Any Member State which is not a party to any agreement
reached pursuant to paragraph 6 may in due course become
a party to such an agreement upon making offers at similar or
acceptable levels to the participating Member States.

13

Article 8
Market Access

A Member State shall not maintain or adopt, either on the
basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire
territory, measures that are defined as:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

limitations on the number of service suppliers
whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies,
exclusive service suppliers or the requirements of an
economic needs test;

limitations on the total value of service transactions
or assets in the form of numerical quotas or the
requirement of an economic needs test;

limitations on the total number of service operations
or on the total quantity of service output expressed in
terms of designated numerical units in the form of
quotas or the requirement of an economic needs
test;°

limitations on the total number of natural persons that
may be employed in a particular service sector or that
a service supplier may employ and who are
necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a
specific service in the form of numerical quotas or the
requirement of an economic needs test;

measures which restrict or require specific types of
legal entity or joint venture through which a service
supplier may supply a service; and

limitations on the participation of foreign capital in
terms of maximum percentage limit on foreign

© Subparagraph (c) does not cover measures of a Member which limit inputs for the
supply of services.

14

shareholding or the total value of individual or
aggregate foreign investment.

Article 9
Local Presence

A Member State shall not require a service supplier of another
Member State to establish or maintain a representative office
or any form of juridical person, or to be resident, in its territory
as a condition for the cross-border supply of a service.®

Article 10
Senior Management and Board of Directors

1. A Member State shall not require that a juridical person of
that Member State appoint to senior management positions,
natural persons of any particular nationality.

2. A Member State may require that a majority of the board
of directors of a juridical person of that Member State be of a
particular nationality or resident in the territory of the Member
State, provided that the requirement does not materially impair
the ability of the investor to exercise control over its
investment.

6 Nothing in this Article shall prevent a Member State from adopting and maintaining
its own regulatory measures regarding the use and location of computing facilities.

15

SECTION Ill
RESERVATIONS

Article 11
Non-Conforming Measures

1. Article 6 (National Treatment), Article 7 (Most-Favoured-
Nation Treatment), Article 8 (Market Access), Article 9 (Local
Presence), and Article 10 (Senior Management and Board of
Directors) do not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is

(c)

maintained by a Member State at:

(i) the central level of Government, as set out in its
Schedule of Non-Conforming Measures in
Annex |:

(ii) a regional level of government, as set out in its
Schedule of Non-Conforming Measures in
Annex I; or

(ili) a local government;

the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-
conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a);
or

an amendment to any non-conforming measure
referred to in subparagraph (a) to the extent that the
amendment does not decrease the conformity of the
measure, as it existed immediately before the date of
entry into force of each Member State’s Schedule of
Non-Conforming Measures, with Article 6 National
Treatment), Article 7 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment), Article 8 (Market Access), Article 9
(Local Presence), and Article 10 (Senior
Management and Board of Directors).

16

2. Article 6(National Treatment), Article 7 (Most-Favoured-
Nation Treatment), Article 8 (Market Access), Article 9 (Local
Presence), and Article 10 (Senior Management and Board of
Directors) do not apply to any measure that a Member State
adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, subsectors or
activities, as set out in its Schedule of Non-Conforming
Measures in Annex II.

3. Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures, as set out in
Annexes | and II, as annexed to this Agreement shall form an
integral part thereof.

4. Member States shall commence discussions upon entry
into force of this Agreement to apply the principle whereby an
amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph 1(a), to the extent that the amendment does not
decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed
immediately before the amendment, with Article 6 (National
Treatment), Article 7 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment),
Article 8 (Market Access), Article 9 (Local Presence), and
Article 10 (Senior Management and Board of Directors). The
outcome of the discussions shall be implemented at the entry
into force of Schedule of Non-Conforming Measures of each
Member State.

Article 12
Transition to Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures

1. Member States shall submit to the ASEAN Secretariat
their Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures in Annex | and
Annex Il in accordance with Article 11 (Non-Conforming
Measures) within 5 years after entry into force of this
Agreement. Viet Nam shall be given additional time until 7
years after entry into force of this Agreement. Cambodia, Lao
PDR and Myanmar shall be given additional time until 13
years after entry into force of this Agreement. The non-
conforming measures reflected in each Member State's

17

respective Schedule shall represent a level of trade
liberalisation that is equal to, or greater than, the level of trade
liberalisation offered under its final AFAS Packages.

2. Within 2 years after Member States set out their
Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures in Annexes | and II
pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, Member States reserve
the right to make amendments to their Schedules of Non-
Conforming Measures in Annexes | and Il, to the extent that
the amendments do not result in a decrease in the level of
commitments made under their respective schedules of
commitments under the final AFAS Packages.

3. Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures in Annexes |
and Il as set out by Member States shall co-exist with the
Schedules of Commitments of Member States under the
AFAS for 7 years after entry into force of this Agreement, 9
years after entry into force of this Agreement for Viet Nam, or
15 years after entry into force of this Agreement for Cambodia,
Lao PDR, and Myanmar. Until such time, in the event of
discrepancy of interpretation of the commitments of a Member
State, its Schedule of Commitment under AFAS shall prevail.

Article 13
Safeguard Measures

1. Member States note the multilateral negotiations
pursuant to Article X of the GATS on the question of
emergency safeguard measures based on the principle of
non-discrimination. Upon the conclusion of such multilateral
negotiations, Member States shall conduct a review for the
purpose of discussing appropriate amendments to this
Agreement so as to incorporate the results of such multilateral
negotiations.

2. In the event that the implementation of the commitments

made in this Agreement causes substantial adverse impact to
a service sector of a Member State before the conclusion of

18

the multilateral negotiations referred to in paragraph 1, the
affected Member State may request consultations with the
Member State or Member States concerned. The requested
Member State or Member States shall enter into consultations
with the requesting Member State on the commitments that
the requested Member State or Member States consider may
have caused substantial adverse impact and on the possibility
of the requesting Member State adopting any measure to
alleviate such impact. The requesting Member State shall
notify all the other Member States of its request for
consultations under this paragraph.

3. Any measures taken pursuant to paragraph 2 shall be
mutually agreed by the consulting Member States.

4. The consulting Member States shall notify the results of
the consultations to all other Member States as soon as
practicable and by no later than the next meeting of the AEM
following the conclusion of consultations.

SECTION IV
REGULATORY OBLIGATIONS AND DISCIPLINES

Article 14
Transparency

1. Member States recognise that transparent measures
governing trade in services are important in facilitating the
ability of service suppliers to gain access to, and operate in,
each other's markets. Each Member State shall promote
regulatory transparency in trade in services.

Publication
2. Each Member State shall publish promptly and, except in

emergency situations, at the latest by the time of their entry
into force:

19

(a) all relevant measures of general application which
pertain to or affect the operation of this Agreement;
and

(b) all international agreements pertaining to, or affecting
trade in services to which a Member State is a Party.

3. To the extent possible, each Member State shall make
the measures and international agreements of the kind
referred to in paragraph 2 available on the internet and, to the
extent provided for under its domestic legal framework, in the
English language.

4. Where publication referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 is not
practicable, such information’ shall be made otherwise
publicly available.

5. To the extent possible and provided for under its domestic
legal framework, each Member State shall provide a
reasonable opportunity for comments by interested persons of
the Member States on any regulation of general application
affecting trade in services that it proposes to adopt, amend or
repeal, before its adoption and publication.

6. To the extent possible, each Member State shall allow
reasonable time between publication of final regulations
relating to the subject matter of this Agreement and their
effective date.

Contact Points
7. Each Member State shall designate a contact point to
facilitate communications among the Member States on any

matter covered by this Agreement. Upon the request of
another Member State, the contact point shall:

’ For greater certainty, Member States agree that such information may be published
in each Member State’s chosen language.

20

(a) identify the office or official responsible for the
relevant matter; and

(b) assist as necessary in facilitating communications
with the requesting Member State with respect to that
matter.

8. Each Member State shall respond promptly to all requests
by any other Member State for specific information on:

(a) any measures referred to in subparagraph 2(a) or
international agreements referred to in subparagraph
2(b); and

(b) any new, or any changes to existing, laws,
regulations or administrative guidelines which
significantly affect trade in services covered by the
Member State’s commitments under this Agreement.

9. Each Member State shall, to the extent possible and
required under its laws and regulations, respond to enquiries
from interested persons of the Member States regarding any
relevant measure of the Member State regarding the subject
matter of this Agreement.

Article 15
Disclosure of Confidential Information

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as requiring
a Member State to provide to the other Member States
confidential information the disclosure of which would impede
law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest
or which would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests
of particular juridical persons, public or private.

2. Where a Member State provides information to another

Member State in accordance with this Agreement and
designates the information as confidential, the other Member

21

State shall maintain the confidentiality of the information. Such
information shall be used only for the purposes specified, and
shall not be otherwise disclosed without the specific written
permission of the Member State providing the information.

Article 16
Domestic Regulation

1. Each Member State shall ensure that all measures of
general application affecting trade in services are
administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial manner.

2. (a) Each Member State shall maintain or institute as
soon as practicable judicial, arbitral or administrative
tribunals or procedures which provide, at the request
of an affected service supplier, for the prompt review
of, and where justified, appropriate remedies for,
administrative decisions affecting trade in services.
Where such procedures are not independent of the
agency entrusted with the administrative decision
concerned, the Member State shall ensure that the
procedures in fact provide for an objective and
impartial review.

(b) The provisions of subparagraph (a) shall not be
construed to require a Member State to institute such
tribunals or procedures where this would be
inconsistent with its constitutional structure or the
nature of its legal system.

3. Where authorisation is required by the domestic laws and
regulations for the supply of a service, the competent
authorities of that Member State shall:

(a) in the case of an incomplete application, at the

request of the applicant, identify all the additional
information that is required to complete the

22

(b)

(c)

(d)

application and provide the opportunity to remedy
deficiencies within a reasonable timeframe;

at the request of the applicant, provide, without
undue delay, information concerning the status of the
application;

within a reasonable period of time after the
submission of an application considered complete
under domestic laws and regulations, inform the
applicant of the decision concerning the application;
and

if an application is terminated or denied, to the
maximum extent possible, inform the applicant in
writing and without delay the reasons for such action.
The applicant will have the possibility of resubmitting,
at its discretion, a new application.

4. Where a Member State adopts or maintains measures

relating

to licensing requirements and _ procedures,

qualification requirements and procedures, or where a
Member State adopts or maintains measures relating to
technical standards as a condition for the supply of a service,
the Member State shall ensure that:

(a)

(b)

(c)

such measures are based on objective and
transparent criteria;

the procedures are impartial, and that the procedures
are adequate for applicants to demonstrate whether
they meet the requirements, where — such
requirements exist; and

the procedures are reasonable and do not in

themselves unduly - prevent _ fulfilment — of
requirements.

23

5. (a) A Member State shall not apply licensing and
qualification requirements and technical standards
that nullify or impair its obligation under this
Agreement in a manner which:

(i) does not comply with the criteria outlined in
subparagraphs 4 (a), (b) or (c); and

(ii) could not reasonably have been expected of that
Member State at the time the commitments in
those sectors were made.

(b) In determining whether a Member State is in
conformity with the obligation under subparagraph 5
(a), account shall be taken of international standards
of relevant international organisations applied by that
Member State.

6. With respect to professional services®, each Member
State shall provide for adequate procedures to verify the
competence of professionals of any other Member State.

7. EachMember State shall ensure its competent authorities
accept copies of documents authenticated in accordance with
its domestic laws and regulations, in place of original
documents, to the extent domestic laws and regulations
permit.

8. If licensing or qualification requirements include the
completion of an examination, each Member State shall, to the
extent practicable, ensure that:

(a) the examination is scheduled at reasonably frequent
intervals; and

(b) a reasonable period of time is provided to enable
interested persons to submit an application.

8 As classified under Business Services Sector of the document MTN.GNS/W/120 of
the World Trade Organisation.

24

9. Member States shall, in accordance with their domestic
laws and regulations, endeavour to accept applications in
electronic format under the equivalent conditions of
authenticity as paper submissions.

10. Each Member State shall ensure that the authorisation
fees’ charged by the competent authority are reasonable,
transparent and do not in themselves restrict the supply of the
relevant service.

11. If the results of the negotiations related to paragraph 4 of
Article VI of the GATS enter into effect, this Article shall be
amended, as appropriate, after consultations between the
Member States, to bring those results into effect under this
Agreement.

Article 17
Recognition

1. A Member State may recognise the education or
experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or
certifications granted in another Member State, for the
purpose of licensing or certification of service suppliers. Such
recognition, which may be achieved through harmonisation or
otherwise, may be based upon an agreement or arrangement
with the Member State concerned or may be accorded
autonomously.

2. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as to prevent a
Member State from according recognition autonomously.
Where a Member State accords recognition autonomously to
another Member State, it shall afford adequate opportunity for
any other Member State to demonstrate that education,

° Authorisation fees include licensing fees and fees relating to qualification procedures;
they do not include fees for the use of natural resources, payments for auction,
tendering or other non-discriminatory means of awarding concessions, or mandated
contributions to universal service provision.

25

experience, licenses, or _ certifications obtained or
requirements met in that other Member State's territory should
be recognised.

3. In order to further facilitate the mobility of professionals
and skilled labour, Member States shall encourage competent
authorities to negotiate mutual recognition agreements or
arrangements in sectors they deem appropriate.

4. A Member State shall not accord recognition in a manner
which would constitute a means of discrimination between
Member States in the application of its standards or criteria for
the authorisation, licensing or certification of service suppliers
or in a disguised restriction on trade in services.

Article 18
Payments and Transfers

1. Except under the circumstances envisaged in Article 19
(Restriction to Safeguard the Balance of Payments), a
Member State shall not apply restrictions on international
transfers and payments for current transactions that relate to
the supply of services in which it has committed to allow under
this Agreement.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and
obligations of Member States as members of the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) under the Articles of Agreement of the
International Monetary Fund, including the use of exchange
actions which are in conformity with the Articles of Agreement
of the International Monetary Fund, provided that a Member
State shall not impose restrictions on any capital transactions,
except under Article 19 (Restriction to Safeguard the Balance
of Payments) or at the request of the IMF.

26

Article 19
Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of Payments

1. In the event of serious balance of payments and external
financial difficulties or threat thereof, or if, exceptional
circumstances, movements of capital cause, or threaten to
cause, serious economic or financial disturbance in a Member
State, that Member State may adopt or maintain restrictions
on trade in services including on payments or transfers. It is
recognised that particular pressures on the balance of
payments of a Member State in the process of economic
development or economic transition may necessitate the use
of restrictions to ensure, inter alia, the maintenance of a level
of financial reserves adequate for the implementation of its
programme of economic development or economic transition.

2. The restrictions referred to in paragraph 1:
(a) shall not discriminate among Member States;

(b) shall be consistent with the Articles of Agreement of
the International Monetary Fund;

(c) shall avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial,
economic and financial interests of any other
Member State;

(d) shall not exceed those necessary to deal with the
circumstances described in paragraph 1; and

(e) shall be temporary and be phased out progressively
as the situation specified in paragraph 1 improves.

3. In determining the incidence of such restrictions, Member
States may give priority to the supply of services which are
more essential to their economic or development
programmes. However, such restrictions shall not be adopted
or maintained for the purpose of protecting a particular service
sector.

2/

Article 20
Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers

1. Each Member State shall ensure that any monopoly
supplier of a service in its territory does not, in the supply of
the monopoly service in the relevant market, act in a manner
inconsistent with that Member State's obligations under Article
7 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) and Article 11 (Non-
Conforming Measures).

2. Where a Member State's monopoly supplier competes,
either directly or through an affiliated company, in the supply
of a service outside the scope of its monopoly rights and which
is subject to that Member State's commitments under this
Agreement, the Member State shall ensure that such a
supplier does not abuse its monopoly position to act in its
territory in a manner inconsistent with such commitments.

3. The AEM may, at the request of a Member State which
has a reason to believe that a monopoly supplier of a service
of any other Member State is acting in a manner inconsistent
with paragraph 1 or 2, request the Member State establishing,
maintaining or authorising such supplier to provide specific
information concerning the relevant operations.

4. If, after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, a
Member State grants monopoly rights regarding the supply of
a service covered by its commitments under this Agreement,
that Member State shall notify the AEM no later than three
months before the intended implementation of the grant of
monopoly rights, and Article 33 (Amendments) shall apply.

5. The provisions of this Article shall also apply to cases of
exclusive service suppliers, where a Member State, formally
or in effect, (a) authorises or establishes a small number of
service suppliers and (b) substantially prevents competition
among those service suppliers in its territory.

28

Article 21
Business Practices

1. Member States recognise that certain business practices
of service suppliers, other than those falling under Article 20
(Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers), may restrain
competition and thereby restrict trade in services.

2. Each Member State shall, at the request of any other
Member State, enter into consultations with a view to
eliminating practices referred to in paragraph 1. The Member
State addressed shall accord full and sympathetic
consideration to such a request and shall cooperate through
the supply of publicly available non-confidential information of
relevance to the matter in question. The Member State
addressed shall also provide other information available to the
requesting Member State, subject to its domestic law and to
the conclusion of satisfactory agreement concerning the
safeguarding of its confidentiality by the requesting Member
State.

Article 22
General Exceptions

Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied
in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or
unjustifiable discrimination between countries where like
conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade in
services, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to
prevent the adoption or enforcement by any Member State of
measures:

(a) necessary to protect public morals or to maintain
public order'?:

10 The public order exception may be invoked only where a genuine and sufficiently
serious threat is posed to one of the fundamental interests of society.

29

(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or

health;

(Cc) necessary to secure compliance with laws or

regulations which are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Agreement including those relating
to:

(i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent
practices or to deal with the effects of a default
on services contracts;

(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in
relation to the processing and dissemination of
personal data and_ the protection'§ of
confidentiality of individual records § and
accounts; or

(ili) safety;

(d) inconsistent with Article 6 (National Treatment),

provided that the difference in treatment is aimed at
ensuring the equitable or effective’! imposition or

11 Measures that are aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or
collection of direct taxes include measures taken by a Member State under its taxation
system which:

(i)

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

(v)

(vi)

apply to non-resident service suppliers in recognition of the fact that the tax
obligation of non-residents is determined with respect to taxable items sourced
or located in the Member State's territory; or

apply to non-residents in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes
in the Member State's territory; or

apply to non-residents or residents in order to prevent the avoidance or evasion
of taxes, including compliance measures; or

apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the territory of another
Member State in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes on such
consumers derived from sources in the Member State's territory; or
distinguish service suppliers subject to tax on worldwide taxable items from
other service suppliers, in recognition of the difference in the nature of the tax
base between them; or

determine, allocate or apportion income, profit, gain, loss, deduction or credit
of resident persons or branches, or between related persons or branches of
the same person, in order to safeguard the Member State's tax base.

30

(e)

collection of direct taxes in respect of services or
service suppliers of other Member States;

inconsistent with Article 7 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment), provided that the difference in treatment
is the result of an agreement on the avoidance of
double taxation or provisions on the avoidance of
double taxation in any other international agreement
or arrangement by which the Member State is bound.

Article 23
Security Exceptions

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a)

(b)

to require any Member State to furnish any
information, the disclosure of which it considers
contrary to its essential security interests; or

to prevent any Member State from taking any action
which it considers necessary for the protection of its
essential security interests:

(i) relating to the supply of services as carried out
directly or indirectly for the purpose of
provisioning a military establishment;

(ii) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or
the materials from which they are derived;

(ili) action taken so as to protect critical public
infrastructures including communications, power
and water infrastructures from _ deliberate

Tax terms or concepts in paragraph (d) of Article 22 (General Exceptions) and in this
footnote are determined according to tax definitions and concepts, or equivalent or
similar definitions and concepts, under the domestic law of the Member State taking
the measure.

31

attempts intended to disable or degrade such
infrastructures;

(iv) taken in time of war or other emergency in
international relations; or

(c) to prevent any Member State from taking any action
in pursuance of its obligations under the United
Nations Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

2. The AEM shall be informed to the fullest extent possible
of measures taken under paragraphs 1(b) and (c) and of their
termination.

Articles 24
Subsidies

1. Notwithstanding Article 2 (Scope), Member States shall
review the issue of disciplines on subsidies related to trade in
services in light of any disciplines agreed under Article XV of
GATS with a view to their incorporation into this Agreement.

2. A Member State which considers that it is adversely
affected by a subsidy related to trade in services of another
Member State may request consultations with that Member
State on such matters. The requested Member State shall
accord sympathetic consideration to such request.

3. The provisions of Article 34 (Dispute Settlement) shall not
apply to any requests made or consultations held under the
provisions of this Article or to any disputes that may arise
between the Member States out of, or under, the provisions of
this Article.

32

SECTION V
FACILITATION AND COOPERATION

Article 25

Increasing the Participation of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises in the ASEAN Economic Community

1. Member States shall enhance the ability of Micro, Small
and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) to participate in and benefit
from the opportunities provided by this Agreement.

2. Member States shall endeavour to cooperate in the
following fields:

(a)

—
oO
—S

(f)

developing and promoting capacity building which
include, but not limited to, trainings, mentoring,
workshops and seminars, to inform MSMEs of the
benefits that may be available to MSMEs under this
Agreement;

facilitating the development of programmes to assist
MSMEs to participate and integrate effectively into
the global supply and value chain;

identifying and addressing any possible barriers that
hinder MSMEs’ access to other Member States
markets;

identifying and reaching possible solutions that are
mutually acceptable in order to improve the ability of
MSMEs to engage in trade and investment activities;
exchanging information to assist Member States in
monitoring and implementing the Agreement as it
relates to MSMEs; and

other activities to be mutually agreed upon.

33

3. No Member State shall have recourse to dispute
settlement under Article 34 (Dispute Settlement) for any
matter arising under this Article.

Article 26
Technical Assistance

Member States affirm the importance of technical assistance
and sharing of knowledge and experience among Member
States in facilitating their preparation of Schedules of Non-
Conforming Measures in accordance with Article 11 (Non-
Conforming Measures) subject to availability of resources.

Article 2712
Increasing the Participation of Cambodia*, Lao PDR’,
Myanmar and Viet Nam

1. Taking into consideration the different levels of
development of the ASEAN Member States, this Agreement
will include appropriate forms of flexibility including provisions
for special and differential treatment for Cambodia*, Lao
PDR*, Myanmar* and Viet Nam.

2. In this regard, the increasing participation of Cambodia’,
Lao PDR*, Myanmar* and Viet Nam in this Agreement shall
be facilitated through:

(a) strengthening domestic services capacity and its
efficiency and competitiveness, inter alia, through
access to technology on a commercial basis;

(b) improving their access to distribution channels and
information networks;

12 The asterisk (*) denotes Least Developed Countries as determined by criteria issued
by ECOSOC’s Committee for Development Policy.

34

(C) recognising that commitments of Cambodia*, Lao
PDR*, Myanmar* and Viet Nam shall be made in
accordance with its individual stage of development;
and

(d) extending appropriate flexibility to Cambodia*, Lao
PDR*, Myanmar* and Viet Nam in the process of
scheduling and amending their Annexes pursuant to
Article 12.

Article 28
Private Sector Engagement

1. Member States shall encourage dialogue, interaction and
networking between their service suppliers.

2. Member States may invite representatives of service
suppliers or associations to provide inputs and/or views on
issues relating to trade in services.

SECTION VI
FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 29
Relation to Other Agreements
Nothing in this Agreement shall derogate from the existing

rights and obligations of a Member State under any other
international agreement’ to which it is a party.

13 The term “other international agreement” includes international agreements related
to taxation.

35

Article 30
Annexes and Future Legal Instruments

1. This Agreement shall include the following Annexes and
the contents therein which shall form an integral part of this
Agreement:

(a) Annex on Financial Services;

(b) Annex on Telecommunication Services;

(c) Annex on Air Transport Ancillary Services;

(d) Annex | on Non-Conforming Measures; and

(e) Annex Il on Non-Conforming Measures.
2. All future legal instruments agreed pursuant to this
Agreement shall also form an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 31

Institutional Mechanism

1. The AEM shall be responsible for the implementation of
this Agreement.

2. The AEM | shall coordinate and _ oversee’ the
implementation of this Agreement across Member State
States and across related ASEAN bodies.

3. The ASEAN Coordinating Committee on Services (CCS)
and, for the purposes of this Agreement, other relevant
government officials shall assist the AEM in implementing this
Agreement.

4. In the fulfilment of its functions, the AEM may establish
subsidiary bodies and assign them to perform/undertake/

36

accomplish certain tasks or delegate its responsibilities to any
subsidiary bodies.

Article 32
Review

With a view to furthering the objectives of this Agreement,
Member States shall undertake a general review of its
provisions within five years from its entry into force. Every five
years thereafter, Member States shall undertake a
subsequent review of the provisions of this Agreement
together with the Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures,
unless otherwise agreed by the Member States.

Article 33
Amendments

1. The provisions of this Agreement may be modified
through amendments mutually agreed upon in writing by the
Member States.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the Annexes referred to in
paragraph 1 of Article 30 (Annexes and Future Legal
Instruments) may be modified through amendments endorsed
by AEM, ASEAN Finance Ministers and Central Bank
Governors Meeting or ATM as appropriate. The said
amendments shall be administratively annexed to this
Agreement and serve as an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 34
Dispute Settlement
Unless otherwise specified in this Agreement, the ASEAN

Protocol on Enhanced Dispute Settlement Mechanism signed
on 29 November 2004 in Vientiane, Lao PDR, or its

3/

successor, shall apply to the settlement of disputes
concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement.

Article 35
Denial of Benefits

A Member State may deny the benefits of this Agreement:

(a) to the supply of any service, if it establishes that the
service is supplied from or in the territory of a non-
Member State;

(b) in the case of the supply of a maritime transport
service, if it establishes that the service is supplied:

(i) by a vessel registered under the laws of a non-
Member State, and

(ii) by a person of a non-Member State which
operates and/or uses the vessel in whole or in
part;

(c) to a service supplier that is a juridical person, if it
establishes that it is not a service supplier of another
Member State.

Article 36
Transitional Arrangement Relating to the AFAS

1. In accordance with Article 12 (Transition to Schedules of
Non-Conforming Measures), the AFAS and its schedules of
commitments made by Member States under the AFAS as
signed by the AEM, AFM and ATM, will remain in force,
mutatis mutandis, until 7 years after entry into force of this
Agreement, until 9 years after entry into force of this
Agreement for Viet Nam, or until 15 years after entry into force
of this Agreement for Cambodia, Lao PDR and Myanmar.

38

2. The AFAS and its Protocols shall be superseded by this
Agreement and its Annexes, upon the completion of the
respective periods mentioned in paragraph 1.

Article 37
Entry into Force

1. This Agreement shall enter into force one hundred and
eighty (180) days after the signing of this Agreement.

2. Member States shall complete their internal procedures
for the entry into force of this Agreement. Each Member State
shall, upon the completion of its internal procedures for the
entry into force of this Agreement, notify the Secretary-
General of ASEAN in writing.

3. Where a Member State is unable to notify the completion
of its internal procedures within one hundred and eighty (180)
days after the date of signing, the rights and obligations of that
Member State under this Agreement shall commence on the
date on which the Member State notifies the completion of its
internal procedures.

4. The Secretary-General of ASEAN shall promptly notify all
Member States of the notifications or deposit of each
instrument of ratification referred to in paragraph 2 of this
Article.

Article 38
Depositary
This Agreement shall be deposited with the Secretary-General

of ASEAN who shall promptly furnish a certified copy thereof
to each Member State.

---

ASEAN COMPREHENSIVE INVESTMENT AGREEMENT

RECALLING the decisions of the 39° ASEAN Economic
Ministers (“AEM”) Meeting held in Makati City, Philippines on
23 August 2007 to revise the Framework Agreement on the
ASEAN Investment Area signed in Makati City, Philippines
on 7 October 1998 (“AIA Agreement”), as amended, into a
comprehensive investment agreement which is_ forward-
looking, with improved features and provisions, comparable
to international best practices in order to increase intra-
ASEAN investments and to enhance ASEAN’s
competitiveness in attracting inward investments into
ASEAN;

RECOGNISING the different levels of development within
ASEAN especially the least developed Member States which
require some flexibility including special and differential
treatment as ASEAN moves towards a more integrated and
interdependent future;

REAFFIRMING the need to move forward from the AIA
Agreement and the ASEAN Agreement for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments signed in Manila, Philippines
on 15 December 1987 (“ASEAN IGA”), as amended, in order
to further enhance regional integration to realise the vision of
the ASEAN Economic Community (“AEC”);

CONVINCED that sustained inflows of new investments and
reinvestments will promote and ensure’ dynamic
development of ASEAN economies;

RECOGNISING that a conducive investment environment
will enhance freer flow of capital, goods and services,
technology and human resource and overall economic and
social development in ASEAN; and

DETERMINED to further intensify economic cooperation
between and among Member States,

HAVE AGREED as follows:

SECTION A

Article 1
Objective

The objective of this Agreement is to create a free and open
investment regime in ASEAN in order to achieve the end
goal of economic integration under the AEC in accordance
with the AEC Blueprint, through the following:

(a) progressive liberalisation of the investment
regimes of Member States;

(b) provision of enhanced protection to investors of
all Member States and their investments;

(Cc) improvement of transparency and predictability of
investment rules, regulations and procedures
conducive to increased investment among
Member States;

(d) joint promotion of the region as an integrated
investment area; and

(e)

cooperation to create favourable conditions for
investment by investors of a Member State in the
territory of the other Member States.

Article 2
Guiding Principles

This Agreement shall create a liberal, facilitative, transparent
and competitive investment environment in ASEAN by
adhering to the following principles:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

provide for investment liberalisation, protection,
investment promotion and facilitation;

progressive liberalisation of investment with a
view towards achieving a free and open
investment environment in the region;

benefit investors and their investments based in
ASEAN;

maintain and accord preferential treatment
among Member States;

no back-tracking of commitments made under
the AIA Agreement and the ASEAN IGA;

grant special and differential treatment and other
flexibilities to Member States depending on their
level of development and sectoral sensitivities;

reciprocal treatment in the enjoyment of
concessions among Member States, where
appropriate; and

accommodate expansion of scope of this
Agreement to cover other sectors in the future.

Article 3
Scope of Application

1. This Agreement shall apply to measures adopted or
maintained by a Member State relating to:

(a) investors of any other Member State; and

(bo) investments, in its territory, of investors of any
other Member State.

2. This Agreement shall apply to existing investments as
at the date of entry into force of this Agreement as well as to
investments made after the entry into force of this
Agreement.
3. For the purpose of liberalisation and subject to Article 9
(Reservations), this Agreement shall apply to the following
sectors:

(a) manufacturing;

(b) agriculture;

(c) fishery;

(d) forestry;

(e) mining and quarrying;

(f) | services incidental to manufacturing, agriculture,
fishery, forestry, mining and quarrying; and

(g) any other sectors, as may be agreed upon by all
Member States.

4. This Agreement shall not apply to:

(a) any taxation measures, except for Articles 13
(Transfers) and 14 °#(Expropriation and
Compensation);

(ob) subsidies or grants provided by a Member State;
(Cc) government procurement;

(d) services supplied in the exercise of governmental
authority by the relevant body or authority of a
Member State. For the purposes of this
Agreement, a service supplied in the exercise of
governmental authority means any service, which
is supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in
competition with one or more service suppliers;
and

(e) measures adopted or maintained by a Member
State affecting trade in services under the
ASEAN Framework Agreement on Services
signed in Bangkok, Thailand on 15 December
1995 (““AFAS”).

5. Notwithstanding sub-paragraph 4 (e), for the purpose
of protection of investment with respect to the commercial
presence mode of service supply, Articles 11 (Treatment of
Investment), 12 (Compensation in Cases of Strife), 13
(Transfers), 14 (Expropriation and Compensation) and 15
(Subrogation) and Section B (Investment Disputes Between
an Investor and a Member State), shall apply, mutatis
mutandis, to any measure affecting the supply of a service
by a service supplier of a Member State through commercial
presence in the territory of any other Member State but only
to the extent that they relate to an investment and obligation
under this Agreement regardless of whether or not such
service sector is scheduled in the Member States’ schedule
of commitments made under AFAS.

6. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and
obligations of any Member State under any tax convention.
In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement
and any such convention, that convention shall prevail to the
extent of the inconsistency.

Article 4
Definitions

For the purpose of this Agreement:

(a)

(b)

“covered investment” means, with respect to a
Member State, an investment in its territory of an
investor of any other Member State in existence
as of the date of entry into force of this
Agreement or established, acquired or expanded
thereafter, and has been admitted according to
its laws, regulations, and national policies, and
where applicable, specifically approved in writing’
by the competent authority of a Member State;

“freely usable currency” means a freely usable
currency as determined by the International
Monetary Fund (“IMF”) under its Articles of
Agreement and any amendments thereto;

For the purpose of protection, the procedures relating to specific
approval in writing shall be as specified in Annex 1 (Approval in

Writing).

2

(c) “investment”? means every kind of asset, owned

or controlled, by an investor, including but not
limited to the following:

(i) © movable and immovable property and other
property rights such as mortgages, liens or
pledges;

(ii) | shares, stocks, bonds and debentures and
any other forms of participation in a juridical
person and rights or interest derived
therefrom;

(ili) intellectual property rights which = are
conferred pursuant to the laws’ and
regulations of each Member State;

(iv) claims to money or to any contractual
performance related to a business and
having financial value;”

(v) rights under contracts, including turnkey,
construction, management, production or
revenue-sharing contracts; and

Where an asset lacks the characteristics of an investment, that
asset is not an investment regardless of the form it may take. The
characteristics of an investment include the commitment of capital,
the expectation of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk.

For greater certainty, investment does not mean claims to money

that arise solely from:

(a) | commercial contracts for sale of goods or services; or

(b) the extension of credit in connection with such commercial
contracts.

(d)

(e)

(f)

(vi) business concessions required to conduct
economic activities and having financial
value conferred by law or under a contract,
including any concessions to search,
cultivate, extract or exploit natural
resources.

The term “investment” also includes amounts
yielded by investments, in particular, profits,
interest, capital gains, dividend, royalties and
fees. Any alteration of the form in which assets
are invested or reinvested shall not affect their
classification as investment;

“investor” means a natural person of a Member
State or a juridical person of a Member State that
is making, or has made an investment in the
territory of any other Member State;

“juridical person” means any legal entity duly
constituted or otherwise organised under the
applicable law of a Member State, whether for
profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned
or governmentally-owned, including any
enterprise, corporation, trust, partnership, joint
venture, sole proprietorship, association, or
organisation;

“measures means any measure of a Member
State, whether in the form of laws, regulations,
rules, procedures, decisions, and administrative
actions or practice, adopted or maintained by:

(i) central, regional or local government or
authorities; or

(ii) | non-governmental bodies in the exercise of
powers delegated by central, regional or
local governments or authorities;

(g) “natural person” means any natural person
possessing the nationality or citizenship of, or
right of permanent residence in the Member
State in accordance with its laws, regulations and
national policies;

(n) “newer ASEAN Member States” means the
Kingdom of Cambodia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, the Union of Myanmar and
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam;

(i) “WTO” means the World Trade Organisation; and

j) “WTO Agreement” means the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World’ Trade
Organisation, done at Marrakesh, Morocco on 15
April 1994, as may be amended.

Article 5
National Treatment

1. Each Member State shall accord to investors of any
other Member State treatment no less favourable than that it
accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with
respect to the admission, establishment, acquisition,
expansion, management, conduct, operation and sale or
other disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Member State shall accord to investments of
investors of any other Member State treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to
investments in its territory of its own investors with respect to
the admission, establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation and sale or other
disposition of investments.

Article 6
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment’

1. Each Member State shall accord to investors of
another Member State treatment no less favourable than that
it accords, in like circumstances, to investors of any other
Member State or a non-Member State with respect to the
admission, establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation and sale or other
disposition of investments.

2. Each Member State shall accord to investments of
investors of another Member State treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to
investments in its territory of investors of any other Member
State or a non-Member State with respect to the admission,
establishment, acquisition, | expansion, management,
conduct, operation and sale or other disposition of
investments.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not be construed so as to
oblige a Member State to extend to investors or investments
of other Member States the benefit of any treatment,
preference or privilege resulting from:

* For greater certainty:

(a) this Article shall not apply to investor-State dispute
settlement procedures that are available in other agreements
to which Member States are party; and

(b) in relation to investments falling within the scope of this
Agreement, any preferential treatment granted by a Member
State to investors of any other Member State or a non-
Member State and to their investments, under any existing or
future agreements or arrangements to which a Member State
is a party shall be extended on a most-favoured-nation basis
to all Member States.

10

(a) any sub-regional arrangements between and
among Member States;” or

(b) any existing agreement notified by Member
States to the AIA Council pursuant to Article 8(3)
of the AIA Agreement.®

Article 7
Prohibition of Performance Requirements

1. The provisions of the Agreement on Trade-Related
Investment Measures in Annex 1A to the WIO Agreement
(TRIMs), which are not specifically mentioned in or modified
by this Agreement, shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to this
Agreement.

2. Member States shall undertake joint assessment on
performance requirements no later than 2 years from the
date of entry into force of this Agreement. The aim of such
assessment shall include reviewing existing performance
requirements and considering the need for additional
commitments under this Article.

3. Non-WTO Members of ASEAN shall abide by the WTO
provisions in accordance with their accession commitments
to the WTO.

° For greater certainty, sub-regional arrangements between and

among Member States shall include but not be limited to Greater
Mekong Sub-region (“GMS”), ASEAN Mekong Basin Development
Cooperation (“AMBDC’”), Indonesia-Malaysia-Thailand Growth
Triangle (“IMT-GT”), | Indonesia-Malaysia-Singapore Growth
Triangle (“IMS-GT”), Brunei-lndonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East
ASEAN Growth Area (“BIMP-EAGA’”).

This sub-paragraph refers to the Treaty of Amity and Economic

Relations between the Kingdom of Thailand and the United States
of America signed in Bangkok, Thailand on 29 May 1966.

11

Article 8
Senior Management and Board of Directors

1. A Member State shall not require that a juridical person
of that Member State appoint to senior management
positions, natural persons of any particular nationality.

2. A Member State may require that a majority of the
board of directors of a juridical person of that Member State,
be of a particular nationality, or resident in the territory of the
Member State, provided that this requirement does not
materially impair the ability of the investor to exercise control
over its investment.

Article 9
Reservations

1. Articles 5 (National Treatment) and 8 (Senior
Management and Board of Directors) shall not apply to:

(a) any existing measure that is maintained by a
Member State at:

(i) the central level of government, as set out
by that Member State in its reservation list
in the Schedule referred to in paragraph 2;

(ii) | the regional level of government, as set out
by that Member State in its reservation list
in the Schedule referred to in paragraph 2;
and

(iii) a local level of government;

(bo) the continuation or prompt renewal of any
reservations referred to sub-paragraph (a).

2. Each Member State shall submit its reservation list to
the ASEAN Secretariat for the endorsement of the AIA
Council within 6 months after the date of signing of this
Agreement. This list shall form a Schedule to _ this
Agreement.

3. Any amendment or modification to any reservations
contained in the Schedule referred to in paragraph 2 shall be
in accordance with Article 10 (Modification of Commitments).

4. Each Member State shall reduce or eliminate the
reservations specified in the Schedule in accordance with the
three phases of the Strategic Schedule of the AEC Blueprint
and Article 46 (Amendments).

5. Articles 5 (National Treatment) and 6 (Most-Favoured-
Nation Treatment) shall not apply to any measure covered by
an exception to, or derogation from, the obligations under
Articles 3 and 4 of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights in Annex 1C to the WTO
Agreement, as may be amended (“TRIPS Agreement”), as
specifically provided in those Articles and in Article 5 of the
TRIPS Agreement.

Article 10
Modification of Commitments

1. For a period of 12 months after the date of submission
of each Member State's reservation list, a Member State
may adopt any measures or modify any of its reservations
made in the Schedule under Article 9 (Reservations) for
prospective applications to investors of any other Member
States and their investments, provided that such measures
or modification shall not adversely affect any existing
investors and investments.

2. After the expiration of the period referred to in
paragraph 1, a Member State may, by negotiation and

agreement with any other Member States to which it made
commitments under this Agreement, adopt any measure, or
modify or withdraw such commitments and reservations,
provided that such measure, modification or withdrawal shall
not adversely affect any existing investors or investments.’

3. In any such negotiations and agreement referred to in
paragraph 2, which may include provisions for compensatory
adjustments with respect to other sectors, the Member
States concerned shall maintain a general level of reciprocal
and mutually advantageous commitments and reservations
that is not less favourable to investors and investments than
that provided for in this Agreement prior to such negotiations
and agreements.

4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Member State
shall not, under any measure adopted pursuant to this Article
after the entry into force of this Agreement, require an
investor of any other Member State, by reason of that
investor's nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an
investment existing at the time the measure becomes
effective, unless otherwise specified in the initial approval by
the relevant authorities.

Article 11
Treatment of Investment

1. Each Member State shall accord to covered
investments of investors of any other Member State, fair and
equitable treatment and full protection and security.

2. For greater certainty:

"For the avoidance of doubt, Member States shall not adopt any

measures or modify any of its reservation under the Schedule for a
period of 6 months after the expiration of the period specified in
paragraph 1.

14

(a) fair and equitable treatment requires each
Member State not to deny justice in any legal or
administrative proceedings in accordance with
the principle of due process; and

(b) full protection and security requires each Member
State to take such measures aS may be
reasonably necessary to ensure the protection
and security of the covered investments.

3. A determination that there has been a breach of
another provision of this Agreement, or of a separate
international agreement, does not establish that there has
been a breach of this Article.

Article 12
Compensation in Cases of Strife

Each Member State shall accord to investors of any other
Member State, in relation to their covered investments which
suffered losses in its territory due to armed conflict or civil
strife or state of emergency, non-discriminatory treatment
with respect to restitution, compensation or other valuable
consideration.

Article 13

Transfers
1. Each Member State shall allow all transfers relating to
a covered investment to be made freely and without delay

into and out of its territory. Such transfers include:

(a) contributions to capital, including the __ initial
contribution;

(b) profits, capital gains, dividends, royalties, license
fees, technical assistance and technical and

15

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(9)

management fees, interest and other current
income accruing from any covered investment;

proceeds from the total or partial sale or
liquidation of any covered investment;

payments made under a contract, including a
loan agreement;

payments made _ pursuant to Articles 12
(Compensation in Cases of Strife) and 14
(Expropriation and Compensation);

payments arising out of the settlement of a
dispute by any means including adjudication,
arbitration or the agreement of the Member
States to the dispute; and

earnings and other remuneration of personnel
employed and allowed to work in connection with
that covered investment in its territory.

2. Each Member State shall allow transfers relating to a
covered investment to be made in a freely usable currency at
the market rate of exchange prevailing at the time of transfer.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Member State
may prevent or delay a transfer through the equitable, non-
discriminatory, and good faith application of its laws and
regulations relating to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

bankruptcy, insolvency, or the protection of the
rights of creditors;

issuing, trading, or dealing in securities, futures,
options, or derivatives;

criminal or penal offences and the recovery of the
proceeds of crime;

16

(d) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers
when necessary to assist law enforcement or
financial regulatory authorities;

(e) ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in
judicial or administrative proceedings;

(f) taxation;

(g) social security, public retirement, or compulsory
savings schemes;

(h) severance entitlements of employees; and

(i) the requirement to register and satisfy other
formalities imposed by the Central Bank and
other relevant authorities of a Member State.

4. — Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and
obligations of the Member States as members of the IMF,
under the Articles of Agreement of the IMF, including the use
of exchange actions which are in conformity with the Articles
of Agreement of the IMF, provided that a Member State shall
not impose restrictions on any capital transactions
inconsistently with its specific commitments under this
Agreement regarding such transactions, except:

(a) at the request of the IMF;

(bo) under Article 16 (Measures to Safeguard the
Balance-of-Payments); or

(c) where, in exceptional circumstances, movements
of capital cause, or threaten to cause, serious
economic or financial disturbance in the Member
State concerned.

17

5. The measures taken in accordance with sub-paragraph

A(c)°:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(9)

shall be consistent with the Articles of Agreement
of the IMF;

shall not exceed those necessary to deal with the
circumstances described in sub-paragraph 4(c);

shall be temporary and shall be eliminated as
soon as conditions no longer justify their
Institution or maintenance;

shall promptly be notified to the other Member
States;

shall be applied such that any one of the other
Member States is treated no less favourably than
any other Member State or non-Member State;

shall be applied on a national treatment basis;
and

shall avoid unnecessary damage to_ investors
and covered investments, and the commercial,
economic and financial interests of the other
Member State(s).

For greater certainty, any measures taken to ensure the stability of
the exchange rate including to prevent speculative capital flows
shall not be adopted or maintained for the purpose of protecting a
particular sector.

18

Article 14
Expropriation and Compensation”

1. A Member State shall not expropriate or nationalise a
covered investment either directly or through measures
equivalent to expropriation or nationalisation
(“expropriation”), '° except:

(a) fora public purpose;
(b) in anon-discriminatory manner;

(Cc) on payment of prompt, adequate, and effective
compensation; and

(d) in accordance with due process of law.

2. The compensation referred to in sub-paragraph 1(c)
shall:

(a) be paid without delay; "’

(b) be equivalent to the fair market value of the
expropriated investment immediately before or at
the time when the expropriation was _ publicly
announced, or when the expropriation occurred,
whichever is applicable;

° This Article shall be read with Annex 2 (Expropriation and

Compensation).

For the avoidance of doubt, any measure of expropriation relating to
land shall be as defined in the Member States’ respective existing
domestic laws and regulations and any amendments thereto, and
shall be for the purposes of and upon payment of compensation in
accordance with the aforesaid laws and regulations.

Member States understand that there may be legal and

administrative processes that need to be observed before payment
can be made.

19

(c) not reflect any change in value because the
intended expropriation had become known
earlier; and

(d) be fully realisable and freely transferable in
accordance with Article 13 (Transfers) between
the territories of the Member States.

3. In the event of delay, the compensation shall include
an appropriate interest in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the Member State making the expropriation.
The compensation, including any accrued interest, shall be
payable either in the currency in which the investment was
originally made or, if requested by the investor, in a freely
usable currency.

4. If an investor requests payment in a freely useable
currency, the compensation referred to in sub-paragraph
1(c), including any accrued interest, shall be converted into
the currency of payment at the market rate of exchange
prevailing on the date of payment.

5. This Article does not apply to the issuance of
compulsory licenses granted in relation to intellectual
property rights in accordance with the TRIPS Agreement.

Article 15
Subrogation

1. If a Member State or an agency of a Member State
makes a payment to an investor of that Member State under
a guarantee, a contract of insurance or other form of
indemnity it has granted on non-commercial risk in respect of
an investment, the other Member State shall recognise the
subrogation or transfer of any right or title in respect of such
investment. The subrogated or transferred right or claim
shall not be greater than the original right or claim of the

20

investor. This, however, does not necessarily imply
recognition of the latter Member State of the merits of any
case or the amount of any claims arising therefrom.

2. Where a Member State or an agency of a Member
State has made a payment to an investor of that Member
State and has taken over rights and claims of the investor,
that investor shall not, unless authorised to act on behalf of
the Member State or the agency of the Member State
making the payment, pursue those rights and claims against
the other Member State.

3. In the exercise of subrogated rights or claims, a
Member State or the agency of the Member State exercising
such rights or claims shall disclose the coverage of the
claims arrangement with its investors to the relevant Member
State.

Article 16
Measures to Safeguard the
Balance-of-Payments

1. In the event of serious balance-of-payments and
external financial difficulties or threat thereof, a Member
State may adopt or maintain restrictions on payments or
transfers related to investments. It is recognised that
particular pressures on the balance-of-payments of a
Member State in the process of economic development may
necessitate the use of restrictions to ensure, inter alia, the
maintenance of a level of financial reserves adequate for the
implementation of its programme of economic development.

2. The restrictions referred to in paragraph 1 shall:

(a) be consistent with the Articles of Agreement of
the IMF;

21

(b) avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial,
economic and financial interests of another
Member State;

(c) not exceed those necessary to deal with the
circumstances described in paragraph 1;

(d) be temporary and be phased out progressively
as the situation specified in paragraph 1
improves;

(e) be applied such that any one of the other
Member States is treated no less favourably than
any other Member State or non-Member State.

3. Any restrictions adopted or maintained under
paragraph 1, or any changes therein, shall be promptly
notified to the other Member States.

4. To the extent that it does not duplicate the process
under WTO, IMF, or any other similar processes, the
Member State adopting any restrictions under paragraph 1
shall commence consultations with any other Member State
that requests such consultations in order to review the
restrictions adopted by it.

Article 17
General Exceptions

1. Subject to the requirement that such measures are not
applied in a manner which would constitute a means of
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between Member
States or their investors where like conditions prevail, or a
disguised restriction on investors of any other Member State
and their investments, nothing in this Agreement shall be
construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by any
Member State of measures:

22

12

(a) necessary to protect public morals or to maintain
public order; '

(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life
or health;

(Cc) necessary to secure compliance with laws or
regulations which are not inconsistent with this
Agreement, including those relating to:

(i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent
practices to deal with the effects of a
default on a contract;

(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals
in relation to the processing and
dissemination of personal data and the
protection of confidentiality of individual
records and accounts;

(ili) safety;

(d) aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective’
imposition or collection of direct taxes in respect
of investments or investors of any Member State;

(e) imposed for the protection of national treasures
of artistic, historic or archaeological value;

The public order exception may be invoked by a Member State only
where a genuine and sufficiently serious threat is posed to one of
the fundamental interests of society.

For the purpose of this sub-paragraph, footnote 6 of Article XIV of
the General Agreement on Trade in Services in Annex 1B to the
WTO Agreement (GATS) Is incorporated into and forms an integral
part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

23

(f)

relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural
resources if such measures are made effective in
conjunction with’ restrictions on domestic
production or consumption.

2. Insofar as measures affecting the supply of financial
services are concerned, paragraph 2 (Domestic Regulation)
of the Annex on Financial Services of the General
Agreement on Trade in Services in Annex 1B to the WTO
Agreement (“GATS”) shall be incorporated into and form an
integral part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 18
Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a)

(b)

to require any Member State to furnish any
information, the disclosure of which it considers
contrary to its essential security interests; or

to prevent any Member State from taking any
action which it considers necessary for the
protection of its essential security interests,
including but not limited to:

(i) action relating to fissionable and fusionable
materials or the materials from which they
derived;

(ii) action relating to the traffic in arms,
ammunition and implements of war and to
such traffic in other goods and materials as
is carried on directly or indirectly for the
purpose of supplying a military
establishment;

24

(c)

(ili) action taken in time of war or other
emergency in domestic or international
relations;

(iv) action taken so as to protect critical public
infrastructure, including communication,
power and water infrastructures, from
deliberate attempts intended to disable or
degrade such infrastructure; or

to prevent any Member State from taking any
action pursuant to its obligations under the
United Nations Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Article 19
Denial of Benefits

1. A Member State may deny the benefits of this
Agreement to:

(a)

(b)

an investor of another Member State that is a
juridical person of such other Member State and
to investments of such investor if an investor of a
non-Member State owns or controls the juridical
person and the juridical person has _ no
substantive business operations in the territory of
such other Member State;

an investor of another Member State that is a
juridical person of such other Member State and
to investments of such investor if an investor of
the denying Member State owns or controls the
juridical person and the juridical person has no
substantive business operations in the territory of
such other Member State; and

25

(Cc) an investor of another Member State that is a
juridical person of such other Member State and
to an investment of such investor if investors of a
non-Member State own or control the juridical
person, and the denying Member State does not
maintain diplomatic relations with the non-
Member State.

2. Following notification to the Member State of the
investor, and without prejudice to paragraph 1, a Member
State may deny the benefits of this Agreement to investors of
another Member State and to investments of that investor,
where it establishes that such investor has made an
investment in breach of the domestic laws of the denying
Member State by misrepresenting its ownership in those
areas of investment which are reserved for natural or juridical
persons of the denying Member State.

3. A juridical person is:

(a) “owned” by an investor in accordance with the
laws, regulations and national policies of each
Member States;

(b) “controlled” by an investor if the investor has the
power to name a majority of its directors or
otherwise to legally direct its actions.

Article 20
Special Formalities and Disclosure of Information

1. Nothing in Articles 5 (National Treatment) or 6 (Most-
Favoured-Nation Treatment) shall be construed to prevent a
Member State from adopting or maintaining a measure that
prescribes special formalities in connection with investments,
including a requirement that investments be legally
constituted or assume a certain legal form under the laws or
regulations of the Member State and compliance with

26

registration requirements, provided that such formalities do
not materially impair the rights afforded by a Member State
to investors of another Member State and investments
pursuant to this Agreement.

2. Notwithstanding Articles 5 (National Treatment) or 6
(Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), a Member State may
require an investor of another Member State, or a covered
investment, to provide’ information concerning _ that
investment solely for informational or statistical purposes.
The Member State shall protect any confidential information
from any disclosure that would prejudice legitimate
commercial interests or particular juridical persons, public or
private or the competitive position of the investor or the
covered investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be
construed to prevent a Member State from otherwise
obtaining or disclosing information in connection with the
equitable and good faith application of its law.

Article 21
Transparency

1. In order to achieve the objectives of this Agreement,
each Member State shall:

(a) promptly and at least annually inform the AIA
Council of any investment-related agreements or
arrangements which it has entered into and
where preferential treatment was granted;

(bo) promptly and at least annually inform the AIA
Council of the introduction of any new law or of
any changes to existing laws, regulations or
administrative guidelines, which — significantly
affect investments or commitments of a Member
State under this Agreement;

2/

(c) make publicly available, all relevant laws,
regulations and administrative guidelines of
general application that pertain to, or affect
investments in the territory of the Member State;
and

(d) establish or designate an enquiry point where,
upon request of any natural person, juridical
person or any other Member State, all
information relating to the measures required to
be published or made available under sub-
paragraphs (b) and (c) may be promptly
obtained.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall require a Member
State to furnish or allow access to any confidential
information, including information concerning — particular
investors or investments, the disclosure of which would
impede law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the
public interest, or which would prejudice legitimate
commercial interests of particular juridical persons, public or
private.

Article 22
Entry, Temporary Stay and Work of
Investors and Key Personnel

Subject to its immigration and labour laws, regulations and
national policies relating to the entry, temporary stay and
authorisation to work, and consistent with its commitments
under AFAS, each Member State shall grant entry,
temporary stay and authorisation to work to investors,
executives, managers and members of the board of directors
of a juridical person of any other Member State, for the
purpose of establishing, developing, administering or
advising on the operation in the territory of the former
Member State of an investment to which they, or a juridical
person of the other Member States that employs such

28

executives, managers and members of the board of
directors, have committed or are in the process of committing
a substantial amount of capital or other resources.

Article 23
Special and Differential Treatment
for the Newer ASEAN Member States

In order to increase the benefits of this Agreement for the
newer ASEAN Member States, and in accordance with the
objectives and principles set out in the Preamble and Articles
1 (Objective) and 2 (Guiding Principles), Member States
recognise the importance of according special and
differential treatment to the newer ASEAN Member States,
through:

(a) technical assistance to strengthen their capacity
in relation to investment policies and promotion,
including in areas such as human resource
development;

(b) commitments in areas of interest to the newer
ASEAN Member States; and

(c) recognising that commitments by each newer
ASEAN Member State may be made in
accordance with its’ individual stage of
development.

Article 24
Promotion of Investment

Member States shall cooperate in increasing awareness of
ASEAN as an integrated investment area in order to increase
foreign investment into ASEAN and intra-ASEAN
investments through, among others:

29

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

encouraging the growth and development of
ASEAN small and medium enterprises and multi-
national enterprises;

enhancing industrial complementation and
production networks among multi-national
enterprises in ASEAN;

organising investment missions that focus on
developing regional clusters and production
networks;

organising and supporting the organisation of
various briefings and seminars on investment
opportunities and on investment laws, regulations
and policies; and

conducting exchanges on other issues of mutual

concern relating to investment promotion.

Article 25
Facilitation of Investment

Member States shall endeavour to cooperate in the
facilitation of investments into and within ASEAN through,
among others:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

creating the necessary environment for all forms
of investments;

streamlining and_ simplifying procedures for
investment applications and approvals;

promoting dissemination of investment
information, including investment rules,
regulations, policies and procedures;

establishing one-stop investment centres;

30

(e) strengthening databases on all forms. of
investments for policy formulation to improve
ASEAN’s investment environment;

(f) undertaking consultation with the business
community on investment matters; and

(g) providing advisory services to the business
community of the other Member States.

Article 26
Enhancing ASEAN Integration

Member States recognise the importance of fostering
ASEAN economic integration through various initiatives,
including the Initiative for ASEAN Integration, Priority
Integration Sectors, and AEC, all of which include
cooperation on investment. In order to enhance ASEAN
economic integration, Member States shall endeavour to,
among others:

(a) harmonise, where possible, investment policies
and measures to achieve industrial
complementation;

(b) build and strengthen capacity of Member States,
including human resource development, in the
formulation and improvement of investment
policies to attract investment;

(c) share information on investment policies and
best practices, including promoted activities and
industries; and

(d) support investment promotion efforts amongst
Member States for mutual benefits.

31

Article 27
Disputes Between or Among Member States

The ASEAN Protocol on Enhanced Dispute Settlement
Mechanism signed in Vientiane, Lao PDR on 29 November
2004, as amended, shall apply to the settlement of disputes
concerning the interpretation or application of this
Agreement.

SECTION B

Investment Dispute Between
an Investor and a Member State

Article 28
Definitions

For the purpose of this Section:
(a) “Appointing Authority” means:

(i) in the case of arbitration under Article
33(1)(b) or (c), the Secretary-General of
ICSID;

(ii) in the case of arbitration under Article
33(1)(d), the Secretary-General of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration; or

(ii) in the case of arbitration under Article
33(1)(e) and (f), the Secretary-General, or
a person holding equivalent position, of that
arbitration centre or institution;

32

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(9)

(h)

(i)

“disputing investor’ means an investor of a
Member State that makes a claim on its own
behalf under this Section, and where relevant,
includes an investor of a Member State that
makes a claim on behalf of a juridical person of
the other Member State that the investor owns or
controls;

“disputing Member State” means a Member
State against which a claim is made under this
Section;

“disputing parties” means a disputing investor
and a disputing Member State;

“ICSID” means the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes;

“ICSID Additional Facility Rules” means the
Rules Governing the Additional Facility for the
Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat
of the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes;

“ICSID Convention” means the Convention on
the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and National of other States, done at
Washington, D.C., United States of America on
18 March 1965;

“New York Convention” means the United
Nations Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at
New York, United States of America on 10 June
1958;

“non-disputing Member State” means _ the
Member State of the disputing investor; and

“UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules” means the
arbitration rules of the United Nations
Commission on_ International Trade Law,
approved by the United Nations General
Assembly on 15 December 1976.

Article 29
Scope of Coverage

1. This Section shall apply to an investment dispute
between a Member State and an investor of another Member
State that has incurred loss or damage by reason of an
alleged breach of any rights conferred by this Agreement
with respect to the investment of that investor.

2. A natural person possessing the nationality or
citizenship of a Member State shall not pursue a claim
against that Member State under this Section.

3. This Section shall not apply to claims arising out of
events which occurred, or claims which have been raised
prior to the entry into force of this Agreement.

4. Nothing in this Section shall be construed so as to
prevent a disputing investor from seeking administrative or
judicial settlement available within the country of a disputing
Member State.

Article 30
Conciliation
1. The disputing parties may at any time agree to

conciliation, which may begin at any time and be terminated
at the request of the disputing investor at any time.

34

2. If the disputing parties agree, procedures for
conciliation may continue while procedures provided for in
Article 33 (Submission of a Claim) are in progress.

3. Proceedings involving conciliation and positions taken
by the disputing parties during these proceedings shall be
without prejudice to the rights of either disputing parties in
any further proceedings under this Section.

Article 31
Consultations

1. In the event of an investment dispute, the disputing
parties shall initially seek to resolve the dispute through
consultation and negotiation, which may include the use of
non-binding, third party procedures. Such consultations shall
be initiated by a written request for consultations delivered by
the disputing investor to the disputing Member State.

2. Consultations shall commence within 30 days of
receipt by the disputing Member State of the request for
consultations, unless the disputing parties otherwise agree.

3. With the objective of resolving an investment dispute
through consultations, a disputing investor shall make all
reasonable efforts to provide the disputing Member State,
prior to the commencement of consultations, with information
regarding the legal and factual basis for the investment
dispute.

Article 32
Claim by an Investor of a Member State

If an investment dispute has not been resolved within 180
days of the receipt by a disputing Member State of a request
for consultations, the disputing investor may, subject to this
Section, submit to arbitration a claim:

35

(a)

(b)

that the disputing Member State has breached an
Obligation arising under Articles 5 (National
Treatment), 6 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment), 8 (Senior Management and Board of
Directors), 11 (Treatment of Investment), 12
(Compensation in Cases of Strife), 13 (Transfers)
and 14 (Expropriation and Compensation)
relating to the management, conduct, operation
or sale or other disposition of a covered
investment; and

that the disputing investor in relation to its
covered investment has incurred loss or damage
by reason of or arising out of that breach.

Article 33
Submission of a Claim

1. A disputing investor may submit a claim referred to in
Article 32 (Claim by an Investor of a Member State) at the
choice of the disputing investor:

(a)

(b)

to the courts or administrative tribunals of the
disputing Member State, provided that such
courts or tribunals have jurisdiction over such
claims; or

under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules
of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings,“
provided that both the disputing Member State
and the non-disputing Member State are parties
to the ICSID Convention; or

‘4 In the case of the Philippines, submission of a claim to ICSID and
the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings shall be
subject to a written agreement between the disputing parties in the
event that an investment dispute arises.

36

(c) under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules,
provided that either of the disputing Member
State or the non-disputing Member State is a
party to the ICSID Convention; or

(d) under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; or

(e) to the Regional Centre for Arbitration at Kuala
Lumpur or any other regional centre for
arbitration in ASEAN; or

(f) if the disputing parties agree, to any other
arbitration institution,

provided that resort to any arbitration rules or fora under
sub-paragraphs (a) to (f) shall exclude resort to the other.

2. A claim shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under
this Section when the disputing investor's notice of or
request for arbitration (“notice of arbitration”) is received
under the applicable arbitration rules.

3. The arbitration rules applicable under paragraph 1, as
in effect on the date the claim or claims were submitted to
arbitration under this Section, shall govern the arbitration
except to the extent modified by this Agreement.

4. In relation to a specific investment dispute or class of
disputes, the applicable arbitration rules may be waived,
varied or modified by written agreement between the
disputing parties. Such rules shall be binding on the relevant
tribunal or tribunals established under this Section, and on
individual arbitrators serving on such tribunals.

5. The disputing investor shall provide with the notice of
arbitration:

3/

(a)

(b)

the name of the arbitrator that the disputing
investor appoints; or

the disputing investor's written consent for the
Appointing Authority to appoint that arbitrator.

Article 34

Conditions and Limitations on Submission of a Claim

1. The dispute shall be submitted to arbitration under
Article 33(1)(b) to (f) in accordance with this Section, and
shall be conditional upon:

(a)

(b)

(c)

the submission of the investment dispute to such
arbitration taking place within 3 years of the time
at which the disputing investor became aware, or
should reasonably have become aware, of a
breach of an obligation under this Agreement
causing loss or damage to the disputing investor
or a covered investment; and

the disputing investor providing written notice,
which shall be submitted at least 90 days before
the claim is submitted, to the disputing Member
State of its intent to submit the investment
dispute to such arbitration and which briefly
summarises the alleged breach of the disputing
Member State under this Agreement (including
the provisions alleged to have been breached)
and the loss or damage allegedly caused to the
disputing investor or a covered investment; and

the notice of arbitration under Article 33(2) being
accompanied by the disputing investor's written
waiver of the disputing investor's right to initiate
or continue any proceedings before the courts or
administrative tribunals of the disputing Member
State, or other dispute settlement procedures, of

38

any proceeding with respect to any measure
alleged to constitute a breach referred to in
Article 32 (Claim by an Investor of a Member
State).

2. Notwithstanding sub-paragraph 1(c), the disputing
investor shall not be prevented from initiating or continuing
an action that seeks interim measures of protection for the
sole purpose of preserving the disputing investor’s rights and
interests and does not involve the payment of damages or
resolution of the substance of the matter in dispute, before
the courts or administrative tribunals of the disputing Member
State.

3. A Member State shall not give diplomatic protection, or
bring an international claim, in respect of a dispute which one
of its investors and the other Member State have consented
to submit or have submitted to arbitration under this Section,
unless such other Member State has failed to abide by and
comply with the award rendered in such dispute. Diplomatic
protection, for the purposes of this paragraph, shall not
include informal diplomatic exchanges for the sole purpose
of facilitating a settlement of the dispute.

4. A disputing Member State shall not assert, as a
defence, counter-claim, right of set-off or otherwise, that the
disputing investor in relation to the covered investment has
received or will receive, pursuant to an insurance or
guarantee contract, indemnification or other compensation
for all or part of any alleged loss.

Article 35
Selection of Arbitrators

1. Unless the disputing parties otherwise agree, the
tribunal shall comprise three arbitrators:

39

(a) one arbitrator appointed by each of the disputing
parties; and

(ob) the third arbitrator, who shall be the presiding
arbitrator, appointed by agreement of the
disputing parties. The third arbitrator shall be a
national of a non-Member State which has
diplomatic relations with the disputing Member
State and non-disputing Member State, and shall
not have permanent residence in either the
disputing Member State or  non-disputing
Member State.

2. Any person appointed as an arbitrator shall have
expertise or experience in public international law,
international trade or international investment rules. An
arbitrator shall be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity,
reliability, Sound judgment and independence and _ shall
conduct himself or herself on the same basis throughout the
course of the arbitral proceedings.

3. Subject to Article 36 (Conduct of the Arbitration), if a
tribunal has not been constituted within 75 days from the
date that a claim is submitted to arbitration under this
Section, the Appointing Authority, on the request of a
disputing party, shall appoint, in his or her discretion, the
arbitrator or arbitrators who have not been appointed.

4. — The tribunal shall reach its decisions by a majority of
votes and its decisions shall be binding.

5. The parties to the dispute shall bear the cost of their
respective arbitrators to the tribunal and share equally the
cost of the presiding arbitrator and other relevant costs. In
all other respects, the tribunal shall determine its own
procedures.

40

6. The disputing parties may establish rules relating to
expenses incurred by the tribunal, including remuneration of
the arbitrators.

f. Where any arbitrator appointed as provided for in this
Article resigns or becomes unable to act, a successor shall
be appointed in the same manner as prescribed for the
appointment of the original arbitrator and the successor shall
have all the powers and duties of the original arbitrator.

Article 36
Conduct of the Arbitration

1. | Where issues relating to jurisdiction or admissibility are
raised as preliminary objections, the tribunal shall decide the
matter before proceeding to the merits.

2. A disputing Member State may, no later than 30 days
after the constitution of the tribunal, file an objection that a
claim is manifestly without merit. A disputing Member State
may also file an objection that a claim is otherwise outside
the jurisdiction or competence of the tribunal. The disputing
Member State shall specify as precisely as possible the
basis for the objection.

3. The tribunal shall address any such objection as a
preliminary question apart from the merits of the claim. The
disputing parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
present their views and observations to the tribunal. If the
tribunal decides that the claim is manifestly without merit, or
is otherwise not within the jurisdiction or competence of the
tribunal, it shall render an award to that effect.

4, The tribunal may, if warranted, award the prevailing
party reasonable costs and fees incurred in submitting or
opposing the objection. In determining whether such an
award is warranted, the tribunal shall consider whether either
the claim or the objection was frivolous or manifestly without

41

merit, and shall provide the disputing parties a reasonable
opportunity to comment.

5. Unless the disputing parties otherwise agree, the
tribunal shall determine the place of arbitration in accordance
with the applicable arbitration rules, provided that the place
shall be in the territory of a State that is a party to the New
York Convention.

6. Where an investment dispute relate to a measure
which may be a taxation measure, the disputing Member
State and the non-disputing Member State, including
representatives of their tax administrations, shall hold
consultations to determine whether the measure in question
is a taxation measure.

7. Where a disputing investor claims that the disputing
Member State has breached Article 14 (Expropriation and
Compensation) by the adoption or enforcement of a taxation
measure, the disputing Member State and the non-disputing
Member State shall, upon request from the disputing
Member State, hold consultations with a view to determining
whether the taxation measure in question has an effect
equivalent to expropriation or nationalisation.

8. Any tribunal that may be established under this Section
shall accord serious consideration to the decision of both
Member States under paragraphs 6 and 7.

9. If both Member States fail either to initiate such
consultations referred to paragraphs 6 and 7, or to make
such joint decisions, within the period of 180 days from the
date of the receipt of request for consultation referred to in
Article 31 (Consultations), the disputing investor shall not be
prevented from submitting its claim to arbitration in
accordance with this Section.

42

Article 37
Consolidation

Where two or more claims have been submitted separately
to arbitration under Article 32 (Claim by an Investor of a
Member State) and the claims have a question of law or fact
in common and arise out of the same or similar events or
circumstances, all concerned disputing parties may agree to
consolidate those claims in any manner they deem
appropriate.

Article 38
Expert Reports

Without prejudice to the appointment of other kinds of
experts where authorised by the applicable arbitration rules,
the tribunal, at the request of the disputing parties, may
appoint one or more experts to report to it in writing on any
factual issue concerning environmental, public health, safety
or other scientific matters raised by a disputing party in a
proceeding, subject to such terms and conditions as the
disputing parties may agree.

Article 39
Transparency of Arbitral Proceedings

1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3, the disputing Member
State may make publicly available all awards, and decisions
produced by the tribunal.

2. Any of the disputing parties that intend to use
information designated as confidential information in a
hearing shall so advise the tribunal. The tribunal shall make
appropriate arrangements to protect the information from
disclosure.

43

3. Any information specifically designated as confidential
that is submitted to the tribunal or the disputing parties shall
be protected from disclosure to the public.

4. A disputing party may disclose to persons directly
connected with the arbitral proceedings such confidential
information as it considers necessary for the preparation of
its case, but it shall require that such confidential information
is protected.

5. The tribunal shall not require a Member State to furnish
or allow access to information the disclosure of which would
impede law enforcement or would be contrary to the Member
State’s law protecting Cabinet confidences, personal privacy
or the financial affairs and accounts of individual customers
of financial institutions, or which it determines to be contrary
to its essential security.

6. The non-disputing Member State shall be entitled, at its
cost, to receive from the disputing Member State a copy of
the notice of arbitration, no later than 30 days after the date
that such document has been delivered to the disputing
Member State. The disputing Member State shall notify all
other Member States of the receipt of the notice of arbitration
within 30 days thereof.

Article 40
Governing Law

1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3, when a claim is
submitted under Article 33 (Submission of a Claim), the
tribunal shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with
this Agreement, any other applicable agreements between
the Member States, and the applicable rules of international
law and where applicable, any relevant domestic law of the
disputing Member State.

44

2. The tribunal shall, on its own account or at the request
of a disputing party, request a joint interpretation of any
provision of this Agreement that is in issue in a dispute. The
Member States shall submit in writing any joint decision
declaring their interpretation to the tribunal within 60 days of
the delivery of the request. Without prejudice to paragraph 3,
if the Member States fail to issue such a decision within 60
days, any interpretation submitted by a Member State shall
be forwarded to the disputing parties and the tribunal, which
shall decide the issue on its own account.

3. A joint decision of the Member States, declaring their
interpretation of a provision of this Agreement shall be
binding on a tribunal, and any decision or award issued by a
tribunal must be consistent with that joint decision.

Article 41
Awards

1. The disputing parties may agree on a resolution of the
dispute at any time before the tribunal issues its final award.

2. Where a tribunal makes a final award against either of
the disputing parties, the tribunal may award, separately or in
combination, only:

(a) monetary damages and any applicable interest;
and

(b) restitution of property, in which case the award
shall provide that the disputing Member State
may pay monetary damages and any applicable
interest in lieu of restitution.

3. A tribunal may also award costs and attorney's fees in

accordance with this Agreement and the applicable
arbitration rules.

45

4. A tribunal may not award punitive damages.

5. An award made by a tribunal shall have no binding
force except between the disputing parties and in respect of
the particular case.

6. Subject to paragraph 7/7 and the applicable review
procedure for an interim award, the disputing party shall
abide by and comply with an award without delay.”

7. The disputing party may not seek enforcement of a
final award until:

(a) in the case of a final award under the ICSID
Convention:

(i) 120 days has elapsed from the date the
award was rendered and no disputing party
has requested revision or annulment of the
award; or

(ii) revision or annulment proceedings have
been completed;

(bo) in the case of a final award under the ICSID
Additional Facility Rules, the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, or the rules selected pursuant
to Article 33(1)(e):

(i) 90 days have elapsed from the date the
award was rendered and no disputing party
has commenced a proceeding to revise, set
aside, or annul the award; or

'S The Parties understand that there may be domestic legal and
administrative processes that need to be observed before an award
can be complied with.

46

(ii) a court has dismissed or allowed an
application to revise, set aside, or annul the
award and there is no further appeal.

8. A claim that is submitted for arbitration under this
Section shall be considered to arise out of a commercial
relationship or transaction for purposes of Article 1 of the
New York Convention.

9. Each Member State shall provide for the enforcement
of an award in its territory.

SECTION C

Article 42
Institutional Arrangements

1. The AIA Council, as established by the AEM under the
AIA Agreement, shall be responsible for the implementation
of this Agreement.

2. The ASEAN Coordinating Committee on Investment
(“CCI”) as established by the AIA Council and comprising
senior officials responsible for investment and other senior
officials from relevant government agencies, shall assist the
AIA Council in the performance of its functions. The CCI
shall report to the AIA Council through the Senior Economic
Officials Meeting (“SEOM"). The ASEAN Secretariat shall be
the secretariat for the AIA Council and the CCI.

3. The functions of the AIA Council shall be to:
(a) provide policy guidance on global and regional
investment matters concerning promotion,

facilitation, protection, and liberalisation;

(b) oversee, coordinate and review the
implementation of this Agreement;

47

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)
(9)
(h)

update the AEM on the implementation and
operation of this Agreement;

consider and recommend to the AEM any
amendments to this Agreement;

facilitate the avoidance and_ “settlement of
disputes arising from this Agreement;

Supervise and coordinate the work of the CCI;
adopt any necessary decisions; and
carry out any other functions as the AEM may

agree.

Article 43
Consultations by Member States

The Member States agree to consult each other at the
request of any Member State on any matter relating to
investments covered by this Agreement, or otherwise
affecting the implementation of this Agreement.

Article 44
Relation to Other Agreements

Nothing in this Agreement shall derogate from the existing
rights and obligations of a Member State under any other
international agreements to which it is a party.

48

Article 45
Annexes, Schedule and Future Instruments

This Agreement shall include the Annexes, the Schedule and
the contents therein, which shall form an integral part of this
Agreement, and all future legal instruments agreed pursuant
to this Agreement.

Article 46
Amendments

The provisions of this Agreement may be modified through
amendments mutually agreed upon in writing by the Member
States.

Article 47
Transitional Arrangements Relating to the
ASEAN IGA and the AIA Agreement

1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the
ASEAN IGA and the AIA Agreement shall be terminated.

2. Notwithstanding the termination of the AIA Agreement,
the Temporary Exclusion List and the Sensitive List to the
AIA Agreement shall apply to the liberalisation provisions of
the ACIA, mutatis mutandis, until such time that the
Reservation List of ACIA comes into force.

3. With respect to investments falling within the ambit of
this Agreement as well as under the ASEAN IGA, or within
the ambit of this Agreement and the AIA Agreement,
investors of these investments may choose to apply the
provisions, but only in its entirety, of either this Agreement or
the ASEAN IGA or the AIA Agreement, as the case may be,
for a period of 3 years after the date of termination of the
ASEAN IGA and the AIA Agreement.

49

Article 48
Entry into Force

1. | This Agreement shall enter into force after all Member
States have notified or, where necessary, deposited
instruments of ratification with the Secretary-General of
ASEAN, which shall not take more than 180 days after the
signing of this Agreement.

2. The Secretary-General of ASEAN shall promptly notify
all Member States of the notifications or deposit of each
instrument of ratification referred to in paragraph 1.

Article 49
Depositary

This Agreement shall be deposited with the Secretary-
General of ASEAN, who shall promptly furnish a certified
copy thereof to each Member State.