CONSIDERING the  important  links existing  between  Singapore and the  EFTA States,  and wishing to  strengthen  these links through  the creation  of a free trade  area, thus establishing  close and lasting  relations;

REAFFIRMING their  commitment  to  the  principles set out  in the  United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of  Human Rights;

DESIROUS by way of the  removal of obstacles  to  trade  to  contribute  to  the  harmonious development  and expansion of world  trade  and provide  a catalyst  to  broader international  co-operation,  in particular  between  Europe and Asia;

DETERMINED to  create  an expanded and secure market  for  goods and services in their territories;

RESOLVED to ensure  a stable  and predictable  environment  for  investment; INTENDING to enhance the  competitiveness  of  their  firms  in global markets;
AIMING to  create  new employment  opportunities,  improve  living standards  and ensure a large and steadily  growing  volume of  real income in their  respective  territories  through the expansion of trade  and investment  flows;

RECOGNising that  the  gains from  trade  liberalisation  should not  be offset  by private, anti-competitive   practices;

CONVINCED that  this Agreement  will create  conditions  encouraging  economic, trade  and investment  relations  between  them;

BUILDING on their  respective  rights  and obligations  under the  Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the  World Trade Organisation  and the  other  agreements  negotiated
thereunder and other  multilateral  and bilateral  instruments  of  co-operation;  and

RECOGNising that  trade  liberalisation  should allow for the  optimal  use of the  world's resources in accordance with  the objective  of  sustainable development,  seeking both  to protect  and preserve  the  environment;

HAVE AGREED, in pursuit  of the  above, to conclude  the  following  Agreement  (hereinafter referred  to  as "this  Agreement"):

I GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article  1: Objectives

1. The EFTA States  and Singapore hereby establish a free-trade  area in accordance with the  provisions  of this  Agreement.

2. The objectives  of  this  Agreement,  which is based on trade  relations  between  market economies  are:

(a) to  achieve the  liberalisation of  trade in goods, in conformity  with  Article  XXIV of the General Agreement  on Tariffs  and Trade (hereinafter  referred  to  as "the  GATT 1994");

(b) to  promote  competition  in their  economies, particularly  as it  relates to  economic relations  between  the  Parties;

(c) to achieve further  liberalisation  on a mutual  basis of the  government  procurement markets  of  the Parties;

(d) to  achieve the liberalisation of  trade in services, in conformity  with  Article  V of  the General Agreement  on Trade in Services (hereinafter  referred  to  as "the  GATS");

(e) to  mutually  enhance investment  opportunities  and accord constant  protection  for investors  and investments;

(f) to  ensure adequate  and effective  protection  of  intellectual  property  rights,  in accordance with  international  standards;  and

(g) to  contribute  in this way, by the removal of barriers to  trade and investment,  to  the harmonious development  and expansion of world  trade.
Article  2: Geographical Scope

1. Without  prejudice to  Annex I, this  Agreement  shall apply:

(a) to  the land territory,  internal  waters,  and the  territorial sea of a Party, and the air- space above the  territory  in accordance with  international  law; as well as

(b) beyond the  territorial  sea, with  respect  to  measures taken by a Party in the  exercise of its sovereign rights  or jurisdiction  in accordance with international  law.

2. Annex II applies with  respect  to  Norway.
Article  3: Trade and Economic Relations Governed by this  Agreement


1. The provisions of this Agreement apply to  the trade  and economic relations  between, on the one side, the EFTA States and, on the other side, Singapore, but not to the trade relations  between  individual EFTA States,  unless otherwise  provided  for  in this
Agreement.

2. As a result of the customs  union established by the Treaty  of 29  March 1923 between  Switzerland  and the  Principality  of  Liechtenstein,  Switzerland  shall represent the  Principality  of  Liechtenstein  in matters  covered  thereby.
Article  4. Relationship to  Other  Agreements

The provisions of  this Agreement  shall be without  prejudice to  the rights  and obligations of the  Parties under the  Marrakesh Agreement  Establishing the  World Trade Organisation and the other  agreements  negotiated  thereunder  (hereinafter  referred  to  as "the  WTO Agreement")  to  which they  are a party  and any other  international  agreement  to  which they are a party.
Article  5: Regional and Local Government

Each Party is fully responsible for  the  observance of all obligations  and commitments under this Agreement  and shall ensure their  observance by its  respective  regional and local governments  and authorities  and by non-governmental  bodies in the  exercise o f governmental  powers delegated  by central,  regional and local governments  or authorities within  its  territory.

II TRADE IN GOODS
Article  6: Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter applies to:

(a) products  falling within  Chapters 25  through  97  of the  Harmonised Commodity Description  and Coding System  (HS);

(b) products  specified in Annex III with  due regard to  the  arrangements  provided  for  in that Annex;  and

(c) fish and other  marine products  as provided  for  in Annex IV.

2. Singapore and each individual EFTA State  have concluded agreements  on trade  in agricultural  products  on a bilateral  basis. These agreements  form  part  of the  instruments establishing  a free-trade  area between  the  EFTA States  and Singapore.
Article  7: Rules of Origin and Administrative  Co-operation

1. The provisions on rules of  origin and administrative  co-operation  applicable to  Articles 8, 16 and 17  are set out in Annex I.

2. The non-preferential  rules of origin of a Party shall apply to  the  other  Articles  o f this Chapter not  listed under paragraph 1. The arrangements  for  administrative  co-
operation	set out in Annex I shall apply mutatis  mutandis.



3. Two years after  the entry  into force  of this Agreement  the Parties shall meet  t o review Annex I with a view to  adapting  the system  of outward  processing to  their evolving economic needs.   Such review shall take place biannually unless the  Parties agree otherwise.
Article  8:Customs  Duties

1. Upon the entry  into  force  of this  Agreement,  the  Parties shall abolish all customs duties on imports  and exports  of products  originating  in an EFTA State  or in Singapore, excluding the  products  listed in Annex V. No new customs  duties  shall be introduced.

2. A customs duty  includes any duty  or charge of any kind imposed in connection with the  importation  or exportation  of a product,  including any form  of surtax or surcharge in connection  with  such importation  or exportation.
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent  a Party from  imposing at any time  on the importation  or exportation  of  any product  of another  Party:


a. a charge equivalent  to  an internal  tax, such as excise duties and other  taxes, levied a t the time  of  importation  or exportation,  imposed consistently  with  Article 11;   or

b. a fee or other  charge, not  applied on an ad valorem basis, provided that  it is limited  in amount  to the  approximate  cost  of services rendered, and does not  represent  an  indirect  protection  for  domestic  products  or a taxation  of imports  or exports  for  fiscal purposes.
Article  9: Import  and Export Restrictions

Upon the  entry  into force  of this Agreement,  all import  or export  prohibitions  or restrictions  on trade  in goods between  the  EFTA States  and Singapore, other  than customs  duties  and taxes,  whether  made effective  through  quotas,  import  or export licenses or other  measures, shall be eliminated  on all products  of each Party.
Article  10:  Most-Favoured-Nation  Treatment

If a Party concludes a preferential  agreement  with  a non-Party  under Article XXIV  of  the GATT 1994,  it shall, upon request  from  another  Party, afford  adequate  opportunity  t o negotiate  any additional  benefits  granted  therein.
Article  11:  National Treatment

The Parties shall apply national treatment  in accordance with  Article  III of the  GATT   1994,  including its interpretative  notes,  which is hereby incorporated  into  and made part of  this  Agreement.
Article  12:  Sanitary and Phytosanitary  Measures

1. The Parties shall apply their  regulations  in sanitary  and phytosanitary  matters  in a non-discriminatory  manner and shall not  introduce  any new measures that  have the effect  of unduly  obstructing  trade.

2. The principles set out in paragraph 1 shall be applied in accordance with  the WTO Agreement  on the  Application  of  Sanitary and Phytosanitary  Measures, which is hereby incorporated  into  and made part  of this  Agreement.
Article  13:  Technical Regulations

1. The rights  and obligations  of  the Parties in respect  of technical  regulations,  standards and  conformity  assessment shall be governed  by the  WTO Agreement  on Technical Barriers to  Trade.

2. The Parties shall strengthen  their  co-operation  in the  field of  technical  regulations, standards and conformity  assessment with  a view to  increasing the  mutual understanding  of  their  respective  systems  and facilitating  access to  their  respective markets.	To this end, they  shall in particular  co-operate  in:

(a) reinforcing  the  role of international  standards  as a basis for  technical  regulations including conformity   assessment  procedures;

(b) promoting  the  accreditation  of  conformity  assessment bodies on the  basis o f relevant  ISO/IEC Standards and Guides; and

(c) promoting  the  mutual  acceptance  of  conformity  assessment  results  of the  above bodies which have been recognised under an appropriate  multilateral  agreement  between their  respective  accreditation  systems  or bodies.

3. The Parties shall, within  the context  of this  Article,  expeditiously:

(a) broaden the  exchange of  information;  and

(b) give favourable  consideration  to  any written  request  for  consultation.

4. Without  prejudice to  paragraph 1, the Parties agree to hold consultations  in the framework  of the  Joint Committee  to  address any matter  that  may arise from  the application  of  specific  technical  regulations,  standards  and conformity  assessment procedures and which according to  Singapore or one or more of the  EFTA States has created or is likely to  create an obstacle  to trade  between  the Parties, with  a view t o working out  an appropriate  solution  in conformity  with  the  WTO Agreement  on Technical Barriers to  Trade.
Article  14:  State  Trading Enterprises

 The rights  and obligations  of the  Parties in respect  of state  trading  enterprises  shall be governed by Article  XVII of the  GATT 1994  and the Understanding  on the  Interpretation of Article  XVII of the GATT 1994,  which are hereby incorporated  into  and made part  o f this  Agreement.
Article  15:  Subsidies

 The rights  and obligations  of the  Parties in respect  of subsidies shall be governed by Articles  VI and XVI of the  GATT 1994,  the  WTO Agreement  on Subsidies and Countervailing  Measures and the  WTO Agreement  on Agriculture.

Article  16:Anti-Dumping

1. A Party shall not  apply anti-dumping  measures as provided for  under the WTO Agreement  on Implementation  of  Article  VI of the  GATT 1994  in relation  to  products originating  in another  Party.

2. In order to  prevent  dumping, the Parties shall undertake  the  necessary measures as provided  for under Chapter V.
Article  17:  Emergency Action  on Imports  of  Particular Products

1. Where any product  originating  in a Party, as a result  of  the reduction  or elimination  o f a customs duty  under this Agreement,  is being imported  into  the  territory  of  another Party in such increased quantities  and under such conditions  as to  constitute  a substantial  cause of serious injury or threat  thereof  to the  domestic  industry  of like or directly  competitive  products  in the  territory  of the  importing  Party, the  importing  Party may take emergency  measures to  the  minimum extent  necessary to  remedy or prevent the  injury.

2. Such measures shall consist  in increasing the  rate of customs  duty  on the  product  t o a level not  to exceed the lesser of:

a) the most-favoured  nation  (MFN) rate  of duty  in effect  at the time  the action  is taken; and

b) the MFN applied rate of duty  in effect  on the day immediately  preceding the  date o f the entry  into  force  of  this Agreement.

3. Emergency measures shall be taken for  a period not  exceeding one year.    In very exceptional  circumstances,  after  review by the  Joint  Committee,  measures may be taken up to a total  maximum period of three  years. A Party taking such measures shall present a schedule leading to  their  progressive  elimination.  No measures shall be applied to  the import  of a product  which has previously been subject  to  such a measure for a period of, at least, five years since the  expiry of the measure.

4. Emergency measures shall only be taken upon clear evidence that  increased imports have caused or are threatening  to  cause serious injury pursuant  to  an investigation  in accordance with  the  procedures  laid down in the  WTO Agreement  on Safeguards.

5. The Party intending  to  take an emergency  measure under this  Article  shall promptly make a notification  to  the other  Parties and the  Joint Committee,  containing  all pertinent information  which shall include evidence of serious injury or threat  thereof  caused by increased imports,  precise description  of  the  product  involved,  the  proposed  measure, proposed date of  introduction  and expected  duration  of  the  investigation  and the proposed measure. Any Party that  may be affected  by the measure shall simultaneously be offered  compensation  in the  form  of  substantially  equivalent  trade  liberalisation  in relation to the  imports  from  any such Party.

6. The Joint Committee  shall, within  30  days from  the  date of  notification,  examine the information  provided  under paragraph 5 in order to  facilitate  a mutually  acceptable resolution  to  the  matter.	In the absence of such resolution,  the  importing  Party may adopt a measure pursuant to  paragraph 2 to remedy  the problem, and, in the absence o f mutually  agreed compensation,  the  Party against whose product  the  measure is taken may take  compensatory  action.  The emergency  measure and the  compensatory  action shall be immediately  notified  to  the  Joint  Committee.  The compensatory  action  shall consist  of suspension of  concessions having substantially  equivalent  trade  effects  or concessions substantially  equivalent  to  the  value of the  additional  duties  expected  t o result  from  the  emergency  action.	In the  selection  of the  emergency  measure and the compensatory  action,  priority  must  be given to  the action  which least disturbs  the functioning  of  this  Agreement.

7. In critical  circumstances,  where delay would cause damage which would be difficult  t o repair, a Party may take a provisional emergency  measure pursuant  to  a preliminary determination  that  there  is clear evidence that  increased imports  have caused or are threatening  to  cause serious injury. The Party intending  to  take such a measure shall immediately  inform  the  other  Parties and the  Joint Committee  thereof.  The duration  o f any such provisional measure shall be counted  as part  of the initial period and any
extension.

8. Two years after  entry  into  force  of this Agreement  the  Parties shall meet  to  review this Article  with  a view to  determining  whether  there  is a need to maintain  an emergency action  mechanism.

9. If the Parties decide, after  the  first  review, to maintain  such a mechanism, they  shall thereafter  conduct  biennial reviews in the  Joint  Committee.
Article  18:  Balance-of-Payments  Difficulties

1. The Parties shall endeavour to  avoid the imposition  of restrictive  measures for balance-of-payments   purposes.

2. A Party in serious balance-of-payments  difficulties,  or under imminent  threat  thereof, may, in accordance with  the conditions  established  under the  GATT 1994  and the WTO Understanding  on the  Balance-of-Payments  Provisions, adopt  trade  restrictive  measures, which shall be of limited  duration  and non-discriminatory,  and may not  go beyond what  is necessary to  remedy  the  balance-of-payments  situation. The relevant  provisions  of  the GATT 1994  and the  WTO Understanding  on the Balance-of-Payments  Provisions are hereby incorporated  into  and made part  of this  Agreement.

3. The Party introducing  a measure under this Article  shall promptly  notify  the  other Parties and the  Joint  Committee  thereof.
Article  19:  General Exceptions

Subject to the  requirement  that  such measures are not  applied in a manner which would constitute  a means of  arbitrary  or unjustifiable  discrimination  between  countries  where the same conditions  prevail, or a disguised restriction  on international  trade,  nothing  in

this Agreement  shall be construed  to  prevent  the  adoption  or enforcement  by any Party of measures:

(a) necessary to  protect  public morals;

(b) necessary to  protect  human, animal or plant  life or health;

(c) relating  to  the  importations  or exportations  of  gold and silver;

(d) necessary to  secure compliance with  laws or regulations  which are not  inconsistent with  the  provisions  of this  Agreement,  including those  relating  to  customs  enforcement, the enforcement  of  monopolies operated  under paragraph 4 of Article  II and Article  XVII of the GATT 1994,  the  protection  of patents,  trade  marks and copyrights,  and the prevention  of  deceptive  practices;

(e) relating  to the  products  of  prison labour;

(f) imposed  for  the  protection  of  national  treasures  of  artistic,  historic  or archaeological value;

(g) relating to  the  conservation  of  exhaustible natural  resources if such measures are made effective  in conjunction  with  restrictions on domestic  production  or consumption;

(h) undertaken  in pursuance of  obligations  under any intergovernmental  commodity agreement  which conforms  to  criteria  submitted  to  the  Members of the  WTO and not disapproved by them  or which is itself  so submitted  and not  so disapproved;

(i) involving  restrictions  on exports  of  domestic  materials  necessary to  ensure essential quantities  of  such materials to  a domestic  processing industry  during periods when the domestic  price of such materials is held below the world price as part of a governmental stabilisation  plan; provided  that  such restrictions  shall not  operate  to increase the exports  of or the protection  afforded  to  such domestic  industry,  and shall not  depart from  the provisions of the  GATT 1994  relating  to  non discrimination;

(j) essential to  the  acquisition  or distribution  of  products  in general or local short  supply; provided that  any such measures shall be consistent  with  the principle that  all Members of the WTO are entitled  to an equitable  share of  the international  supply of such products,  and that  any such measures, which are inconsistent  with  the other  provisions of this Agreement  shall be discontinued  as soon as the conditions  giving rise to  them have ceased to  exist.
Article  20:  Security  Exceptions

Nothing  in this  Chapter shall be construed:

(a) to require any Party to furnish  any information  the  disclosure of which it considers contrary  to  its  essential security  interests;  or

(b) to prevent any Party from  taking  any action  which it  considers necessary for  the protection  of  its essential security  interests

(i) relating  to fissionable  materials  or the  materials from  which they  are derived;

(ii) relating to  the  traffic  in arms, ammunition  and implements  of war and to such traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on directly  or indirectly  for the purpose o f supplying  a military  establishment;

(iii) taken  in time  of war or other  emergency  in international  relations;  or

(c) )   to prevent  any Party from  taking  any action in pursuance of its obligations  under  the United Nations Charter for  the  maintenance  of  international  peace and security.

III SERVICES
Article  21:  Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter applies to  measures affecting  trade  in services taken by central,  regional or local governments  and authorities  as well as by non-governmental  bodies in the exercise of powers  delegated  by central,  regional or local governments  or authorities.

2. This Chapter applies to  measures affecting  trade  in all services sectors  with  the exception  of air services, including domestic  and international  air transportation  services, whether  scheduled or non-scheduled,  and related  services in support  of  air services,  other  than:

(a) aircraft  repair and maintenance  services;

(b) the selling and marketing  of  air transport  services;

(c) computer  reservation  system  (CRS) services[1 ].

3. The EFTA States  and Singapore agree to  review developments  in the air transport sector  with  a view to  reassessing the  need for  further  co-operation  in this sector.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed  to  impose any obligation  with  respect  t o government   procurement.
Article  22:  Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) "measure" means any measure by a Party, whether  in the  form  of a law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative  action  or any other  form;

(b) "supply of  a service" includes the  production,  distribution,  marketing,  sale and delivery of a service;

(c) "measures by Parties affecting  trade  in services"  include measures in respect  of:


(i) the  purchase, payment  or use of a service;

(ii) the access to  and use of, in connection  with  the supply of a service, services which are required by those  Parties to  be offered  to  the public generally;

(iii) the presence, including commercial presence, of  persons of a Party for the supply o f a service in the  territory  of another  Party;

(d) "commercial  presence"  means any type  of  business or professional  establishment, including  through:

(i) the  constitution,  acquisition  or maintenance  of  a juridical person; or

(ii) the creation  or maintenance of  a branch or a representative  office; within the  territory  of a Party for the  purpose of supplying a service;
(e) "sector"  of a service means:

(i) with  reference  to  a specific commitment,  one or more, or all, subsectors  of that service, as specified  in a Party's  Schedule;

(ii) otherwise,  the  whole of that  service sector,  including all of its subsectors;

(f) "service  supplier"  means any person that  seeks to  supply or supplies a service[2];

(g) "service  consumer"  means any person that  receives or uses a service;

(h) "service  of  another  Party"  means a service which is supplied:

(i) from  or in the territory  of  that  other  Party, or in the case of maritime  transport,  by a vessel registered  under the laws of that  other  Party, or by a person of  that  other  Party which supplies the service through  the operation  of a vessel and/or  its use in whole or in part;  or

(ii)  in the case of the supply of a service through  commercial presence or through  the presence o f natural persons, by a service supplier of  that  other  Party;

(i) "person"  means either  a natural person or a juridical person;

(j) "natural  person of a Party"  means a natural person who resides in the  territory  o f that Party  or elsewhere and who under the law of  that  Party:

(i) is a national of  that  Party; or

(ii) has the  right  of permanent  residence in that  Party and is accorded substantially  the same treatment  as nationals in respect  of  measures affecting  trade  in services;


(k) "juridical  person"  means any legal entity  duly constituted  or otherwise  organised under applicable law, whether  for  profit  or otherwise,  and whether  privately-owned  or governmentally-owned,  including any corporation,  trust,  partnership,  joint  venture,  sole proprietorship  or  association;

(l) "juridical person of another  Party"  means a juridical person which is either:

(i) constituted  or otherwise  organised under the  law of that  other  Party, and is engaged in substantive  business operations[3] in the  territory  of any Party; this includes a service supplier of a WTO member who is a non-Party  that  is a juridical person constituted  under the laws of a Party, provided  that  it engages in substantive  business operations  in the
territory  of the  Parties; or

(ii) in the case of the supply of a service through  commercial presence, owned or controlled  by:

1. natural persons of that  other  Party; or

2. juridical persons identified  under paragraph (l)(i);

(m) a juridical person is:

(i) "owned"  by persons of a Party if more than 50 per cent  of the equity  interest  in it is beneficially  owned by persons of  that  Party;

(ii) "controlled"  by persons of a Party if such persons have the power to  name a majority of its directors  or otherwise  to  legally direct  its  actions;

(iii) "affiliated"  with another  person when it controls,  or is controlled  by, that  other person; or when it and the  other  person are both  controlled  by the  same person;

(n) "monopoly  supplier of a service"  means any person, public or private,  which in the relevant market  of the  territory  of a Party is authorised  or established formally  or in effect  by that  Party as the sole supplier of  that  service;

(o) "trade  in services"  means the  supply of a service:

(i) from  the territory  of a Party into  the  territory  of another  Party (hereinafter  referred to as "cross-border  supply");

(ii) in the territory  of a Party to  the  service consumer of another  Party (hereinafter referred  to  as "consumption  abroad");

(iii) by a service supplier of a Party, through  commercial presence in the territory  o f another  Party  (hereinafter  referred  to  as "commercial  presence");

(iv) by a service supplier of a Party, through  presence of natural persons of that  Party in the territory  of another  Party (hereinafter  referred  to  as "presence  of  natural  persons");

(p) "services"  includes any service in any sector  except  services supplied in the exercise of  governmental  authority;

(q) "a service supplied in the  exercise of governmental  authority"  means any service which is supplied neither  on a commercial basis nor in competition  with  one or more service  suppliers;

(r) "direct  taxes"  comprise all taxes on total  income, on total  capital or on elements o f income or of capital, including taxes on gains from  the  alienation of property,  taxes on estates,  inheritances and gifts,  and taxes on the  total  amounts  of wages or salaries paid by enterprises,  as well as taxes on capital  appreciation.
Article  23:  Most-Favoured-Nation  Treatment

1. Subject  to exceptions  that  may derive from  harmonisation  of  regulations  based on agreements  concluded by a Party with  a non-Party providing  for  mutual  recognition  in accordance with  Article  VII of the GATS, and except  as provided  in Annex VI, a Party shall accord immediately  and unconditionally,  with  respect  to  any measure covered by this Chapter, to  services and service suppliers of another  Party treatment  no less favourable  than that  it accords to  like services and service suppliers of any non-Party.

2. Treatment  granted  under other  agreements  concluded by one of the  Parties with  a non-Party which have been notified  under Article  V of the  GATS shall not  be subject  t o paragraph 1 .

3. If a Party enters into  an agreement  of the type  referred  to  in paragraph 2, it  shall, upon request  from  another  Party, afford  adequate  opportunity  to  the other Parties t o negotiate  the  benefits  granted  therein.
Article  24:  Market Access

1. With respect  to market  access through  the  modes of supply identified  in
Article 22 (o),    each Party shall accord services and service suppliers of another  Party treatment  no less favourable  than that  provided  for  under the  terms,  limitations  and conditions  agreed and specified  in its Schedule[4 ].

2. In sectors where market access commitments are undertaken, the measures which a Party shall not maintain or adopt either on the basis of a regional sub-division or on the basis of its entire  territory,  unless otherwise  specified  in its Schedule, are defined as:

(a) limitations  on the number of service suppliers whether  in the  form  of numerical quotas,  monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the  requirements  of  an economic needs test;

(b) limitations  on the  total  value of service transactions  or assets in the form  o f numerical quotas  or the requirement  of an economic needs test;

(c) limitations  on the  total  number of service operations  or on the  total  quantity  o f service output  expressed in terms  of designated  numerical units  in the  form  of quotas  or the requirement  of  an economic needs test[5 ];

(d) limitations  on the total  number of natural  persons that  may be employed in a particular  service sector  or that  a service supplier may employ and who are necessary for, and directly  related  to,  the supply of a specific service in the form  of numerical quotas or the requirement  of  an economic needs test;

(e) measures which restrict  or require specific types  of legal entity  or joint  venture through  which a service supplier may supply a service; and

(f) limitations  on the participation  of  foreign  capital  in terms  of  maximum percentage limit on foreign  shareholding or the  total  value of individual or aggregate  foreign
investment.
Article  25:  National Treatment

1. In the sectors  inscribed in its Schedule, and subject  to any conditions  and  qualifications  set out  therein,  each Party shall accord to  services and service suppliers o f another Party, in respect  of all measures affecting  the  supply of services, treatment  no less favourable  than  that  it accords to  its own like services and service suppliers[6 ].

2. A Party may meet  the requirement  in paragraph 1 by according to  services and  service suppliers of  another  Party either  formally  identical  treatment  or formally  different treatment  to  that  it accords to  its own like services and service suppliers.

3. Formally identical  or formally  different  treatment  shall be considered to  be less favourable  if it modifies the  conditions  of  competition  in favour  of services or service suppliers of a Party compared to  like services or service suppliers of another  Party. Article  26:  Additional  Commitments

The Parties may negotiate  commitments  with  respect  to  measures affecting  trade  in services not  subject  to  scheduling under Articles  24  and 25  above, including those regarding qualifications,  standards  or licensing matters.  Such commitments  shall be entered  in a Party's  Schedule.
Article  27:  Trade Liberalisation/Schedule  of  Specific  Commitments

1. The Parties shall liberalise trade  in services between  themselves,  in conformity  with Article  V of the GATS.

2. Each Party shall set  out in a Schedule the  specific  commitments  it  undertakes  under Articles  24,  25  and 26.  With respect  to sectors  where such commitments  are undertaken,  each Schedule shall specify:

(a) terms,  limitations  and conditions  on market  access;

(b) conditions  and qualifications  on national  treatment;

(c) undertakings  relating  to  additional commitments;  and

(d) where appropriate,  the  time-frame  for  implementation  of  such commitments.

3. Measures inconsistent  with  both  Articles  24  and 25  shall be inscribed in the  column relating  to  Article  24.	In this case, the inscription  will be considered to  provide a condition  or qualification  to  Article  25  as well.

4. The Parties' Schedules of specific commitments  are set out in Annex VII, and form  an integral  part  of  this Chapter.

5. The Parties undertake  to  review their  Schedules of  specific commitments  at  least every two  years, but  earlier if so agreed, with  a view to  provide for  the elimination o f substantially  all remaining discrimination  between  the  Parties with  regard to  trade  in services covered in this Chapter at the end of a transitional  period of ten years from  the date of entry  into  force  of this Agreement.  Such review shall continue  if substantially  all remaining discrimination  has not  been eliminated  at  the end of this  transitional  period. This paragraph is not  subject  to  dispute  settlement  pursuant  to  Chapter IX.
Article  28:  Domestic  Regulation

1. In sectors  where specific  commitments  are undertaken,  each Party shall ensure that all measures of general application  affecting  trade  in services are administered  in a reasonable, objective and impartial  manner.

2. Each Party shall maintain or institute  as soon as practicable  judicial, arbitral  or administrative  tribunals  or procedures  which provide,  at the  request  of an affected service supplier of another  Party, for the  prompt  review o f, and where justified, appropriate  remedies for,  administrative  decisions affecting  trade  in services.    Where such procedures are not  independent  of  the  agency entrusted  with  the administrative decision concerned, the  Party shall ensure that  the  procedures in fact  provide  for an objective  and impartial  review.

3. Where authorisation  is required for  the  supply of a service on which a specific commitment  has been made, the competent  authorities  of  a Party shall promptly,  after the submission of an application  considered complete  under domestic  laws and regulations,  inform  the  applicant  of the  decision concerning the  application.    At  the request  of the  applicant,  the  competent  authorities  of  the  Party shall provide,  without undue delay, information  concerning  the  status  of the  application.

4. The Parties shall jointly  review the results  of the negotiations  on disciplines for  certain regulations,  including qualification  requirements  and procedures,  technical  standards  and licensing requirements,  pursuant  to  Article VI.4 of the  GATS, with  a view to  their incorporation  into  this  Agreement.	The Parties note that  such disciplines aim to ensure that such  requirements  are inter  alia:

(a) based on objective  and transparent  criteria,  such as competence  and the  ability  t o supply the  service;

(b) not more burdensome than  necessary to  ensure the  quality  of the service;

(c) in the  case of licensing procedures, not  in themselves  a restriction  on the  supply o f the  service.

5. In sectors  where a Party has undertaken  specific  commitments,  subject  to  any terms, limitations,  conditions  or qualifications  set  out  therein,  pending the  incorporation  o f disciplines developed pursuant  to  paragraph 4, a Party shall not  apply licensing and qualification  requirements  and technical  standards that  nullify  or impair such specific commitments  in a manner which:

(a) does not  comply with  the criteria  outlined  in paragraph 4 (a), (b)  or (c)  and

(b) could not  reasonably have been expected  of  that  Party at the time  the specific commitments  in those  sectors  were made.

6. Whenever a domestic  regulation  is prepared, adopted  and applied in accordance with international  standards  of  relevant  international  organisations[7]  applied by a Party, there shall be a rebuttable  presumption  that  it complies with  the  provisions of  this
Article.

7. In sectors  where specific  commitments  regarding  professional  services are undertaken,  each Party shall provide  for  adequate  procedures  to  verify  the  competence of professionals  of  another  Party.
Article  29:  Subsidies

A Party which considers that it is adversely affected by a subsidy of another  Party may request consultations with that Party on such matters. Such requests shall be accorded sympathetic   consideration.
Article  30:  Recognition

1. In principle no later than three  years following  the  entry  into  force  of this Agreement, the Joint Committee  shall establish the  necessary steps  for  the  negotiation  o f agreements  or arrangements  providing  for  the  mutual  recognition  of  education  or experience obtained,  requirements,  qualifications,  licenses and other  regulations,  for  the purpose of the fulfilment,  in whole or in part,  by service suppliers of the criteria  applied by each Party for  the  authorisation,  licensing, operation  and certification  of  service suppliers.

2. Any such recognition  conferred  by a Party shall be in conformity  with  the  relevant provisions of the WTO and, in particular,  Article  VII of the  GATS.

3. Where a Party recognises, by agreement  or arrangement,  the  education  or experience obtained,  requirements  met  or licenses or certifications  granted  in the  territory  of  a non- Party, that  Party shall accord another  Party, upon request,  adequate  opportunity  t o negotiate  its accession to  such an agreement  or arrangement  or to  negotiate  comparable ones with  i t. Where a Party accords recognition  autonomously,  it  shall afford adequate opportunity  for  another  Party to  demonstrate  that  the  education  or

experience obtained,  requirements  met  or licenses or certifications  granted  in the territory  of  that  other  Party should also be recognised.
Article  31:  Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers

1. Each Party shall ensure that  any monopoly  supplier of a service in its territory  does not,  in the supply of the monopoly  service in the relevant  market,  act in a manner inconsistent  with  the  Party's  obligations  under its  specific  commitments.

2. Where a Party's  monopoly  supplier competes,  either  directly  or through  an affiliated company, in the  supply of a service outside  the  scope of its monopoly  rights  and which  is subject to  that  Party's  obligations  under its specific  commitments,  the  Party shall ensure that  such a supplier does not  abuse its monopoly  position  to  act in its territory  in a manner inconsistent  with  such commitments.

3. If a Party has reason to  believe that  a monopoly supplier of a service of another Party is acting in a manner inconsistent with  paragraph 1 or 2, it  may request  that  other  Party to  provide  specific  information  concerning  the  relevant  operations.

4. The provisions of this Article  shall also apply to cases of exclusive service suppliers, where a Party, formally  or in effect,  (a) authorises or establishes a small number o f service suppliers and (b)  substantially  prevents  competition  among those  suppliers in its territory.
Article  32:  Movement  of  Natural Persons

1. This Chapter applies to  measures affecting  natural persons who are service suppliers of a Party, and natural persons of a Party who are employed by a service supplier of a  Party, in respect  of the  supply of a service. Natural persons covered  by a Party's  specific commitments  shall be allowed to supply the  service in accordance with  the  terms  o f those  commitments.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking access t o the employment market of a Party, nor shall it apply to measures regarding citizenship, residence or employment  on a permanent  basis.

3. This Chapter shall not  prevent  a Party from  applying measures to  regulate  the entry of natural persons of another  Party into,  or their  temporary  stay  in, its territory, including those  measures necessary to  protect  the  integrity  of, and to ensure the
orderly

movement of natural persons across, its  borders, provided that such measures are not applied in a manner so as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to a Party under the terms  of a specific  commitment[8 ].
Article  33:  General Exceptions

Subject to the  requirement  that  such measures are not  applied in a manner which would constitute  a means of  arbitrary  or unjustifiable  discrimination  between  countries  where like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction  on trade  in services, nothing  in this

Chapter shall be construed  to  prevent  the adoption  or enforcement  by any Party o f measures:

(a) necessary to  protect  public morals or to maintain  public order[9 ];

(b) necessary to  protect  human, animal or plant life or health;

(c) )  necessary to  secure compliance with  laws or regulations  which are not  inconsistent with  the  provisions of this  Chapter including those  relating  to:

(i) the  prevention  of deceptive  and fraudulent  practices  or to  deal with  the effects  of a default  on services contracts;

(ii) the protection  of the  privacy of individuals in relation to  the processing and dissemination  of  personal data and the  protection  of  confidentiality  of  individual records and  accounts;

(iii) safety;

(d) inconsistent  with  Article  25,  provided  that  the  difference  in treatment  is aimed a t ensuring the  equitable  or effective[10]  imposition  or collection  of  direct  taxes in respect of services or service suppliers of another  Party;

(e) inconsistent  with  Article  23,  provided  that  the  difference  in treatment  is the result of an agreement  on the avoidance of double taxation  or provisions on the avoidance o f double taxation  in any other  international  agreement  or arrangement  by which a Party is bound.
Article  34:  Security  Exceptions

Nothing  in this  Agreement  shall be construed:

(a) to require a Party to furnish or allow access to  information  the  disclosure of which i t considers contrary  to  its  essential security interests;

(b) to prevent  a Party from  taking any action  which it considers necessary for  the protection  of  its essential security  interests:

(i) relating  to the  supply of services as carried out  directly  or indirectly  for  the  purpose of provisioning  a military  establishment;

(ii) relating  to  fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials from  which they  are derived;

(iii) taken  in time  of war or other  emergency  in international	relations;  or

(c) )   to prevent  a Party from  taking  any action  in pursuance of its obligations  under  the United Nations Charter for  the  maintenance  of  international  peace and security.
Article  35:  Restrictions  to  Safeguard the  Balance-of-Payments


1. The Parties shall endeavour to  avoid the imposition  of restrictive  measures for balance-of-payments   purposes.

2. Articles  XI and XII of the  GATS shall apply to payments  and transfers,  and t o restrictions  to  safeguard  the  balance-of-payments  relating  to  trade  in services.

3. A Party adopting  or maintaining  a measure under this Article  shall promptly  notify  the other  Parties and the  Joint  Committee  thereof.
Article  36:  Annexes
Annexes VI to  X form an integral  part  of this Chapter. IV INVESTMENT
Article  37:  Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) "company"  means any entity  constituted  or organised under the  applicable law, whether  or not  for  profit,  and whether  private  or government  owned or controlled, including any corporation,  trust,  partnership,  sole proprietorship,  joint  venture  or other association;

(b) "investment"  means any kind of asset  and particularly:

(i) movable and immovable property  as well as any other  rights  in rem, such as mortgages,  liens, and pledges;

(ii) shares, bonds and debentures  or any other  forms  of  participation  in a company;

(iii) claims to  money or to any performance  associated  with  a company having an economic  value;

(iv) intellectual  property  rights,  technical  know-how  and goodwill;

(v) business concessions conferred  by law or under contract,  including any concession t o search for,  cultivate,  extract  or exploit  natural  resources;

(c) "investment  of  an investor  of a Party"  means an investment  that  is owned or controlled,  either  directly  or indirectly,  by an investor  of  that  Party;

(d) "investor  of a Party" means:

(i) a natural person having the  nationality  of that  Party or having the  right  of  permanent residence of  that  Party in accordance with  its applicable laws;

(ii) a company constituted  or organised under the  applicable law of that  Party and carrying  out  substantial  business activities  there;


making or having made an investment  in the  territory  of another  Party. Article  38:  Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter shall apply to  investors  of a Party, and to  their  investments  whether made before  or after  the  entry  into  force  of this Agreement.

2. Article 40  (1)  shall not  apply to  measures affecting  trade  in services whether  or not  a sector  concerned is scheduled in Chapter III.

3. Article 40  (1)  shall also not  apply to investors  of a Party in services sectors  and their investments  in such sectors.  This provision is subject  to  review after  a period of ten years from  the date of entry  into  force  of this Agreement,  with  a view to  examining its continued  need.

4. The provisions of this Chapter shall be without  prejudice to  the  rights  and obligations of the  Parties under other  international  agreements  relating  to  investment.
Article  39:  Promotion  and Protection

1. Each Party shall, in accordance with  the  provisions of this Chapter, create  and maintain stable,  equitable,  favourable  and transparent  conditions  for  investors  of  the other  Parties to make investments  in its  territory.

2. Such conditions  shall include a commitment  to  accord at all times to  investments  o f investors  of another  Party fair and equitable  treatment.  Such investments  shall also enjoy the most  constant  protection  and security.
Article  40:  National  Treatment  and Most-Favoured-Nation  Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors  and investments  of  investors  of another  Party, in relation  to  the  establishment,  acquisition,  expansion, management,  conduct,  operation and disposal of  investments,  treatment  that  is no less favourable  than that  which i t accords in like situations  to  its  own investors  and their  investments  or to  investors  and their  investments  of  any other  State,  whichever  is more favourable.

2. If a Party accords more favourable  treatment  to  investors  of any other  State  or their investments  by virtue  of a free trade  agreement,  customs  union or similar agreement that also provides for  substantial  liberalisation  of  investments,  it  shall not  be obliged t o accord such treatment  to  investors  of another	Party  or their  investments.  However, upon request  from  another  Party, it shall afford  adequate  opportunity  to  negotiate  the benefits  granted  therein.

3. The standard of national treatment  as provided  for in paragraph 1 shall not  apply t o subsidies based on a Party's social policy or its economic development  policy,  even i f such subsidies, directly  or indirectly,  favour  local enterprises  or entrepreneurs.  If another Party considers that  such subsidies, in a particular  case, have a seriously distortive  effect  on the  investment  opportunities  of its  own investors,  it may request   consultations  on such matters.  Such requests  shall be accorded  sympathetic consideration.


4. The standard  of national treatment  as provided  for in paragraph 1, means, with respect  to  a sub-national  entity,  treatment  no less favourable  than the  most  favourable treatment  accorded, in like situations,  by that  entity  to  investors,  and to  investments  o f investors,  of the Party of which it forms  a part.
Article  41:  Taxation

1. Except as otherwise  provided  for  in this Article,  nothing  in this Chapter shall create rights  or impose obligations  with  respect  to  taxation  measures.

2. Article  40  shall apply to  taxation  measures subject  to  deviations  from  national treatment  that  are necessary for  the  equitable or effective  imposition  or collection  o f direct  taxes[11].

3. If a Party accords special advantages to  investors  and their  investments  of  any  other  State  by virtue  of an agreement  for  the avoidance of double taxation,  it  shall not be obliged to  accord such advantages to	investors  of another  Party and their
investments.
Article  42:  Dispossession, Compensation

1. None of the Parties shall take, either de jure or de facto,  measures of expropriation  or nationalisation  against  investments  of  investors  of another  Party,  unless such measures are in the  public interest;  non-discriminatory;  carried out  under due process of law; and accompanied by the  payment  of  compensation.  The amount  of compensation  shall be settled  in a freely  convertible  currency  and paid without  delay to the  person entitled thereto  without  regard to  its residence or domicile.

2. Investors  of a Party whose investments  in the  territory  of another  Party have suffered losses due to armed conflict  or civil strife  in the territory  of the latter  Party, shall benefit from  treatment  in accordance with  Article  40  as regards restitution,  indemnification, compensation  or any other  settlement  i t adopts  or maintains relating  to  such losses. Article  43:  Domestic  Regulation

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to  prevent  a Party from  adopting,  maintaining or enforcing any measure consistent with  this Chapter that  is in the public interest,  such as measures to  meet  health,  safety  or environmental  concerns.
Article  44:  Transfers

1. Each Party shall allow payments  relating  to  an investment  in its  territory  of an investor  of another  Party to  be freely  transferred  into  and out  of its territory  without delay. Such transfers  shall include, in particular,  though  not  exclusively:

(a) profits,  interest,  dividends, capital gains, royalties  and fees as well as any other amounts  yielded by an investment;

(b) payments  made under a contract  including a loan agreement;

(c) )   additional amounts  to  maintain  or increase an investment;


(d) proceeds from  the sale or liquidation  of all or any part of an investment;  and

(e) earnings and other  remuneration  of  personnel engaged from  abroad in connection with  an investment.

2. A transfer  shall be deemed to  have been made "without  delay"  if effected  within  such a period as is normally required for  the  completion  of  transfer  formalities,  including reports  of  currency  transfers.

3. Each Party shall permit  such transfers  to  be made in a freely  convertible  currency. "Freely convertible  currency"  means a currency  that  is widely traded  in international foreign  exchange markets  and widely used in international  transactions.

4. It is understood  that  paragraphs 1 to 3 above are without  prejudice to  the  equitable, non-discriminatory  and good faith  application  of  laws relating  to:

(a) bankruptcy,  insolvency  or the  protection  of  the rights  of  creditors;

(b) the issuing, trading  or dealing in securities;

(c) criminal or penal offences,  and the recovery  of  proceeds of crimes;

(d) ensuring the  satisfaction  of  judgments  in adjudicatory  proceedings.

5. It is also understood  that  paragraphs 1 to  3 above are without  prejudice t o obligations  under tax  laws or social security  and public retirement  schemes. Article  45:  Key Personnel

1. The Parties shall, subject  to  their laws and regulations  relating  to  the  entry,  stay  and work of natural persons, grant  investors  of  another  Party, and key personnel (executives,  managers and specialists, as defined by the  granting  Party as "Intra- corporate  transferees"  in the  horizontal  commitments  of  its  respective  Appendix o f Annex VII) who are employed by such investors  or investments  of  such investors, temporary  entry,  stay  and authorisation  to  work in their  territories  to engage in
activities  connected  with  the  establishment,  management,  maintenance,  use, enjoyment, expansion or disposal of relevant  investments.

2. The Parties shall, subject  to  their  laws and regulations,  permit  investors  of  another Party which have investments  in their  territories,  and investments  of  such investors,  t o employ any key personnel of the investor's  or the  investment's  choice regardless o f nationality  and citizenship  provided  that  such key personnel has been permitted  t o enter, stay  and work in the  territory  of the  other  Party and that  the  employment concerned conforms  to  the  terms,  conditions  and time  limits  of  the  permission granted to such key personnel.

3. The Parties are encouraged to  grant,  subject  to  their  laws and regulations,  temporary entry  and stay to  the spouse and minor children of an investor  of another  Party or o f

key personnel employed by such investors,  who has been granted  temporary  entry,  stay and authorisation  to  work.
Article  46:  Reservations

1. Article 40  (1),  shall not  apply to:

(a) any reservation  that  is listed by a Party in Annex XI;

(b) an amendment  to  a reservation  covered  by sub-paragraph (a)  to  the  extent  that  the amendment  does not  decrease the  conformity  of  the  reservation  with  Article 40 ;

(c) )   any new reservation  adopted  by a Party, and incorporated  into  Annex XI provided that such  reservation  does not  affect  the  overall level of  commitments  of  that  Party under this Chapter;

to  the  extent  that  such reservation  is inconsistent  with  the  above-mentioned  Article.

2. The Parties undertake  to  review at least every two  years the  status  of  the reservations  set out  in Annex XI with  a view to  reducing the reservations  or removing them.

3. A Party may, at any time,  either  upon the request  o f another  Party or unilaterally, remove in whole or in part  reservations  set out  in Annex XI by written  notification  to  the other  Parties.

4. A Party may, at any time,  incorporate  a new reservation  into  Annex XI in accordance with paragraph 1 (c)  of this Article  by written  notification  to  the other  Parties. On receiving such notification,  the  other  Parties may request  consultations  regarding  the reservation.  On receiving the  request  for  consultations,  the  Party incorporating  the  new reservation  shall enter  into  consultations  with  the  other  Parties.
Article  47:  Subrogation

In the event  that  a Party (or  any agency, institution,  statutory  body or corporation designated by it),  as a result  of an indemnity  it  has given in respect  of an investment  or any part thereof,  makes a payment  to  its own investors  in respect  of any of their  claims under this Chapter, the  other  Party acknowledges that  the  former  Party (or  any agency, institution,  statutory  body or corporation  designated  by it)  is entitled  by virtue  o f subrogation  to  exercise the  rights  and assert the  claims of its own investors.  The subrogated  rights  or claims shall not  be greater  than the original rights  or claims of such investors.
Article  48:  Disputes Between an Investor  and a Party

1. If an investor  of a Party considers that  a measure applied by another  Party is inconsistent  with  an obligation  of this Chapter, thus causing loss or damage to  him or his investment,  he may request  consultations  with  a view to solving  the  matter  amicably.

2. Any such matter  which has not  been settled  within  a period of six months  from  the date of request  for  consultations may be referred  to  the  courts  or administrative

tribunals of the Party concerned or, if both  parties to  the dispute  agree, be submitted  t o one of the  following:

a) arbitration  under the  Convention  on the  Settlement  of  Investment  Disputes between States and Nationals of other  States  (the  " ICSID Convention"),  if this  Convention is available;

b) conciliation  or arbitration  under the Additional  Facility  Rules of the  International Centre for  the  Settlement  of  Investment  Disputes;

c) arbitration  under the Arbitration  Rules of the  United Nations Commission on International  Trade Law.

3. A Party may conclude contractual  agreements  with  investors  of another  Party giving its unconditional  and irrevocable consent  to  the  submission of all or certain  types  o f disputes to  international  conciliation  or arbitration  in accordance with  paragraph 2 above. Such agreements  may be notified  to  the  Depositary  of  this Agreement.
Article  49:  Exceptions

The following  provisions shall apply, mutatis  mutandis,  to  this  Chapter: Articles 33,  34  and 35,  as well as Article  19 (e),  (f)  and (g).
V COMPETITION
Article  50:  Competition

1. The Parties recognise that  certain  business practices,  such as anti-competitive agreements  or concerted  practices,  and abuse of  a dominant  position,  may restrict  trade between  the  Parties.

2. A Party shall, at the request  of another  Party, enter  into consultations  with  a view t o eliminating  practices  referred to  in paragraph 1.	The Party addressed shall accord full and sympathetic  consideration  to  such a request  and shall co-operate  through  the supply of  publicly available non-confidential  information  of  relevance to  the  matter  in question.  Subject  to its  domestic  law and the conclusion of a satisfactory  agreement safeguarding  confidentiality  of  information,  the  Party addressed shall also provide  any other  information  available to  the  requesting  Party.

3. No Party may have recourse to  arbitration  under Chapter  IX with respect  to  matters arising under this  Chapter.

VI GOVERNMENT  PROCUREMENT
Article  51:  Scope and Coverage

1. The rights  and obligations  of the Parties to  this Agreement  in respect  of public procurement  shall be governed  by the  WTO Agreement  on Government  Procurement.

2. The Parties agree to  co-operate  in the Joint Committee  with  the  aim of increasing the understanding  of  their  respective  public procurement  systems,  and achieving further liberalisation  and mutual  opening up of  public procurement  markets.
Article  52:  Exchange of  Information

The Parties shall exchange the names and addresses of "contact  points"  responsible for providing  information  on the  rules and regulations  in the  field of public procurement.
Article  53:  Further  Negotiations

If a Party grants  to  a non-Party, after  the entry  into  force  of this Agreement,  additional benefits  with  regard to  the access to  their  public procurement  markets,  it  shall agree t o enter into  negotiations  with  a view to  extending  these benefits  to  another  Party  on a reciprocal  basis.

VII PROTECTION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
Article  54:  Protection  of  Intellectual  Property

1. The Parties shall grant  and ensure adequate  and effective  protection  of  intellectual property  rights,  and provide  for  measures for  the enforcement  of  such rights  against infringement  thereof,  counterfeiting  and piracy, in accordance with  the  provisions of  this Article,  Annex XII and the  international  agreements  referred  to  therein.

2. The Parties shall accord to each other's  nationals treatment  no less favourable  than that  they  accord to their  own nationals.   Exemptions from  this obligation  must  be in accordance with  the  substantive  provisions  of  the  WTO Agreement  on Trade-Related Aspects  of Intellectual  Property  Rights (hereinafter  referred to  as "the  TRIPS Agreement"),  in particular  Articles  3 and 5 thereof.

3. The Parties shall accord to each other's nationals treatment no less favourable than that they accord to nationals  of any other  State.  Exemptions from  this obligation  must be in accordance with the substantive provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, in particular Articles  4 and 5 thereof.

4. The Parties agree, upon request  of any Party to  the Joint  Committee  and subject  t o its consensus, to  review the  provisions on the  protection  of  intellectual  property  rights contained  in the  present  Article  and in Annex XII, with  a view to  further  improving  the levels of  protection  and to  avoiding or remedying  trade  distortions  caused by actual levels of  protection  of  intellectual  property  rights.

VIII INSTITUTIONAL  PROVISIONS
Article  55:  The Joint  Committee

1. The Parties hereby establish  the  EFTA-Singapore Joint  Committee  comprising representatives  of  each Party. It shall be co-chaired by Ministers or by senior officials delegated  by them  for  this purpose.

2. The Joint  Committee  shall:

(a) supervise  the  implementation  of  this  Agreement;

(b) keep under review the  possibility  of further  removal of barriers to  trade and other restrictive  measures concerning  commerce  between  the  EFTA States  and Singapore;

(c) )   oversee the further  elaboration  of this Agreement;

(d) supervise  the  work of all sub-committees  and working  groups established under this Agreement;

(e) endeavour to  resolve disputes  that  may arise regarding the  interpretation  or application  of  this Agreement;  and

(f) consider  any other  matter  that  may affect  the  operation  of this  Agreement.

3. The Joint Committee  may decide to  set up such sub-committees  and working groups as it considers necessary to  assist it in accomplishing its  tasks. Except where specifically provided  for  in this  Agreement,  the  sub-committees  and working  groups shall work under a mandate established by the  Joint  Committee.

4. The Joint Committee  may take decisions as provided  for  in this  Agreement.  On other matters  the  Joint  Committee  may make recommendations.

5. The Joint  Committee  shall take  decisions and make recommendations  by consensus.

6. The Joint Committee  shall meet  whenever necessary but  normally once every two years. The regular meetings  of the Joint Committee  shall be chaired jointly  by one of  the EFTA States  and Singapore. The Joint  Committee  shall establish its rules of  procedure.

7. Each Party may request at any time, through a notice in writing  to  the other  Parties, that a special meeting of the Joint Committee be held. Such a meeting shall take place within 30  days of receipt  of the  request,  unless the Parties agree otherwise.

8. The Joint Committee  may decide to  amend the Annexes and Appendices to  this Agreement.  Subject  to  paragraph 9, it may set  a date for  the entry  into  force  of such decisions.

9. If a representative  of  a Party in the  Joint Committee  has accepted  a decision subject to the  fulfilment  of  constitutional  requirements,  the  decision shall enter  into  force  on the date that  the  last Party notifies  that  its  internal requirements  have been fulfilled, unless the decision itself  specifies a later date. The Joint Committee  may decide that the decision shall enter  into force  for  those  Parties that  have fulfilled  their  internal requirements,  provided  that  Singapore is one of those  Parties. A Party may apply a decision of the  Joint  Committee  provisionally  until  such decision enters  into  force, subject  to  its  constitutional  requirements.

IX DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
Article  56:  Scope and Coverage


1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply with  respect  to  the avoidance or the settlement  of all disputes  arising from  this Agreement  between  any one or more of the EFTA States  and Singapore.

2. Disputes on the same matter  arising under both  this Agreement  and the WTO Agreement,  or any agreement  negotiated  thereunder,  to  which the  Parties are party, may be settled  in either  forum  at the  discretion  of the  complaining Party. The forum thus selected  shall be used to  the exclusion of the other.

3. Before a Party initiates  a dispute  settlement  proceedings  under the WTO Agreement against another  Party or Parties or, vice versa, that  Party shall notify  all other Parties o f its  intention.
Article  57:  Good Offices, Conciliation or Mediation

1. Good offices, conciliation and mediation are procedures that are undertaken voluntarily if the Parties involved so agree. They may begin at any time and be terminated  at  any time.

2. Proceedings involving  good  offices,  conciliation  and mediation  shall be confidential  and without  prejudice to  their  rights  in any other  proceedings.
Article  58:  Consultations

1. The Parties shall at all times  endeavour to  agree on the interpretation  and application of this Agreement,  and shall make every attempt  through  co-operation  and  consultations  to  arrive at a mutually satisfactory  resolution  of  any matter  that  might affect  its  operation.

2. Any one or more of the  EFTA States  may request  in writing  consultations  with Singapore, and vice-versa whenever a Party considers that  a measure applied by the Party or Parties to which  the request  is made is inconsistent  with  this Agreement  or that any benefit  accruing to  it directly  or indirectly  under this Agreement  is impaired by such measure.[12] The Party requesting  consultations  shall at  the same time  notify  the  other Parties in writing  thereof.  Consultations  shall take  place before  the  Joint  Committee unless the Party or Parties making or receiving the  request  for  consultations  disagree.

3. Consultations  shall be held within  30  days from  the date of receipt  of the request  for consultations.  Consultations  on urgent  matters,  including those  on perishable agricultural goods, shall commence within  15  days from  the receipt  of the request  for  consultations.

4. The Parties involved  in the  consultations  shall provide  sufficient  information  to  enable a full examination of how the measure or other matter might affect the operation of this Agreement  and treat  any confidential  or proprietary  information  exchanged in the  course of consultations  in the  same manner as the Party providing  the  information.

5. The consultations  shall be confidential  and without  prejudice to  the rights  of  the Parties involved  in any further  proceedings.

6. The Parties involved in the  consultations  shall inform  the other  Parties of  any mutually agreed resolution  of the  matter.
Article  59:  Establishment  of  Arbitration  Panel

1. If the matter  has not  been resolved within 60  days, or 30 days in relation  to a matter of urgency,  after  the  date  of receipt  of the  request  for  consultations, it  may be referred to  arbitration  by one or more of the  Parties involved by means of a written  notification addressed to the  Party or Parties complained against. A copy of this  notification  shall also be communicated  to  all Parties so that  each Party may determine  whether  t o participate  in the  dispute.

2. Where more than one Party requests  the  establishment  of  an arbitration  panel relating to the  same matter,  a single arbitration  panel should be established to  examine these complaints  whenever  feasible.

3. A request for arbitration shall give the reason for the complaint including the identification of the measure at issue and an indication of the legal basis of the complaint.
Article  60:  Arbitration  Panel

1. The arbitration  panel shall comprise three  members.

2. In the written  notification  pursuant  to  Article  59,  the Party or the  Parties referring  the dispute  to  arbitration  shall designate  one member of the  arbitration  panel.

3. Within 15  days of the  receipt  of the  notification  referred  to  in paragraph 2, the  Party or Parties to  which it was addressed to  shall designate one member of the  arbitration panel.

4. The Parties to  the dispute  shall agree on the  appointment  of the  third  arbitrator  within 30  days of the  appointment  of the  second arbitrator.  The member thus appointed shall chair the  arbitration  panel.

5. If all 3 members have not been designated  or appointed  within  45  days from  the date of receipt of the notification  referred  to  in paragraph 2, the  necessary designations  shall be made at the request of any Party to the dispute by the Director-General of the World Trade Organisation within  a further  30  days.

6. The Chair of the arbitration  panel shall not  be a national of any of the Parties, nor have his or her usual place of residence in the territory  of any of the Parties, nor be employed or previously have been employed by any of the  Parties, nor have dealt with the case in any capacity.

7. If an arbitrator  dies, withdraws  or is removed,  a replacement  shall be selected  within 15 days in accordance with  the selection  procedure followed  to  select him or her. In such a case, any time  period applicable to  the  arbitration  panel proceedings shall be suspended for  a period beginning on the  date the arbitrator  dies, withdraws  or is removed and ending on the date  the replacement  is selected.


8. The date of establishment  of  the arbitration  panel shall be the date  on which the Chair is appointed.
Article  61:  Procedures of  the  Arbitration  Panel

1. Unless the  Parties to  the dispute  agree otherwise,  the arbitration  panel proceedings shall be conducted  in accordance with  the  Model Rules of Procedure that  shall be  adopted  at the  first  meeting  of the  Joint Committee.  Pending the  adoption  of such rules, the arbitration  panel shall regulate  its own procedures, unless the  Parties to  the  dispute agree otherwise.

2. Notwithstanding  paragraph 1,  for  all arbitration  panel proceedings  the  procedures shall ensure that:

(a) the Parties to the  dispute  have the right  to  at least one hearing before  the arbitration  panel as well as the  opportunity  to  provide  initial and rebuttal  written submissions;

(b) the Parties to  the dispute  shall be invited  to  all the hearings held by the arbitration panel;

(c) all submissions and comments  made to  the  arbitration  panel be available to  the Parties to  the  dispute,  subject  to  any requirements  on confidentiality;  and

(d) hearings, deliberations  and initial report  and all written  submissions to  and communications  with  the  arbitration  panel be confidential.

3. Unless the Parties to  the dispute  otherwise  agree within  20  days from  the date o f delivery of the  request  for  the establishment  of  the arbitration  panel, the  terms  o f reference  shall be:

"To examine, in the light  of the  relevant  provisions of the  Agreement,  the  matter referred to  in the  request  for the  establishment  of  an arbitration  panel pursuant t o Article  59  and to make findings of law and fact  together  with  the  reasons therefore  as well as recommendations,  if any, for  the  resolution  of the  dispute."

4. At the request  of a Party to the  dispute  or on its own initiative,  the  arbitration  panel may seek scientific  information  and technical  advice from  experts  as it  deems appropriate.

5. The arbitration  panel shall make its award based on the provisions of this Agreement, applied and interpreted  in accordance with  the  rules of  interpretation  of public international  law.



6. Decisions of the  arbitration  panel shall be taken by a majority  of its members. Panellists may furnish separate  opinions on matters  not  unanimously agreed.	No

arbitration  panel may disclose which panellists are associated with  majority  or minority opinions.

7. The expenses of the  arbitration  panel, including the  remuneration  of  its members, shall be borne by the Parties to  the dispute  in equal shares.
Article  62:  Initial Report

1. The arbitration  panel shall within  90  days from  the  date  of the  establishment  of the arbitration  panel present  to the  Parties to  the dispute  an initial report.

2. The arbitration  panel shall base its report  on the  submissions and arguments  of  the Parties to the  dispute  and on any scientific  information  and technical  advice pursuant  t o paragraph 4 of Article  61 .

3. A Party to  the dispute  may submit  written  comments  to  the  arbitration  panel on its initial report  within  14  days of presentation  of the  report.

4. In such an event,  and after  considering such written  comments,  the  arbitration  panel, on its own initiative  or at the request  of any of the Parties to  the dispute, may:

(a) request  the views of any of the Parties to  the dispute;

(b) reconsider its report;  and

(c) make any further  examination  that  it  considers appropriate. Article  63:  Final Report

1. The arbitration  panel shall present  to  the Parties to  the dispute  a final report, containing  the  matters  referred  to  in paragraph 2 of Article  62,  including any separate opinions on matters  not  unanimously agreed, within  30  days of  presentation  of the  initial report.

2. Unless the  Parties to  the dispute  decide otherwise,  the final report  shall be published 15 days after  it is presented  to  them.
Article  64:  Termination  of  Arbitration  Panel Proceedings

A complaining Party may withdraw  its complaint  at any time  before  the  initial report  has been issued. Such withdrawal  is without  prejudice to  its right  to  introduce  a new complaint  regarding the same issue at a later point  in time.
Article  65:  Implementation  of  Arbitration  Panel Reports

1. The final report  shall be final and binding on the Parties to the  dispute.  Each Party t o the dispute  shall be bound to  take the measures involved in carrying out  the final report referred to  in Article  63 .

2. The Party or Parties concerned shall inform  the  other  Party or Parties to the  dispute within 30  days after  the final report  has been issued of its intentions  in respect  of  its implementation.


3. The Parties to  the dispute  shall endeavour to  agree on the specific measures that  are required for  implementing  the  final report.  Wherever possible, the  resolution  shall be the removal of a measure not  conforming  to  this Agreement,  or failing such a resolution, compensation.

4. The Party or Parties concerned shall promptly  comply with  the final report.  If it is impracticable  to  comply  immediately,  the  Parties to  the  dispute  shall endeavour to  agree on a reasonable period of time to  do so. In the absence of such agreement,  any Party t o the dispute  may request  the original arbitration  panel to  determine  the  length  of  the reasonable period of time,  in light of the particular  circumstances  of the  case. The ruling of the arbitration  panel shall be given within 15  days from  that  request.

5. The Party or Parties concerned shall notify  to  the other  Party or Parties to  the dispute the measures adopted  in order to  implement  the  final report  before  the  expiry of the reasonable period of time  determined  in accordance with  paragraph 4. Upon that notification,  any Party to the  dispute  may request  the  original arbitration  panel to  rule   on the conformity  of  those  measures with  the final report.  The ruling of the  arbitration panel shall be given within  60  days from  that  request.

6. If the Party or Parties concerned fails to  notify  the implementing  measures before  the expiry of the reasonable period of time  determined  in accordance with  paragraph 4, or i f the arbitration  panel rules that  the  implementing  measures notified by the  Party or Parties concerned are inconsistent  with  the  final report,  such Party or Parties shall, if so requested  by the  complaining Party or Parties, enter  into consultations  with  a view t o agree on a mutually  acceptable  compensation.  If no such agreement  has been reached within 20  days from  the request,  the complaining Party or Parties shall be entitled  t o suspend only the  application  of  benefits  granted  under this  Agreement  equivalent  t o those affected  by the  measure found  to violate  this  Agreement.

7. In considering what  benefits  to  suspend, the  complaining Party or Parties should first seek to suspend benefits  in the same sector  or sectors  as that  affected  by the measure that  the  arbitration  panel has found to  violate  this Agreement.  The complaining Party or Parties that  consider it  is not practicable  or effective  to suspend benefits  in the same sector  or sectors  may suspend benefits  in other  sectors.

8. The complaining Party or Parties shall notify  the  other  Party or Parties of the  benefits which it intends to suspend no later than 60  days before  the date on which the suspension is due to take  effect.  Within 15  days from  that  notification,  any of  the Parties to the  dispute  may request  the  original arbitration  panel to rule on whether  the benefits  which the  complaining Party or Parties intend  to suspend are equivalent  t o those affected  by the  measure found  to violate  this Agreement,  and whether  the proposed suspension is in accordance with  paragraphs 6 and 7. The ruling of the arbitration  panel shall be given within  45  days from  that  request.  Benefits  shall not  be suspended until  the arbitration  panel has issued its  ruling.

9. The suspension of benefits  shall be temporary  and shall only be applied by the complaining Party or Parties until  the  measure found  to  violate  this Agreement  has been

withdrawn  or amended so as to  bring it into  conformity  with  this Agreement,  or the Parties to the  dispute  have reached agreement  on a resolution  of the  dispute.

10. At  the request  of any of the Parties to  the dispute, the original arbitration  panel shall rule on the conformity  with  the  final report  of any implementing  measures adopted after  the suspension of benefits  and, in light of such ruling, whether  the  suspension o f benefits  should be terminated  or modified.  The ruling of the  arbitration  panel shall be given within  30  days from  the  date of that  request.

11. The rulings provided for  in paragraphs 4, 5, 8 and 10 shall be binding. Article  66:  Other Provisions

Any time  period mentioned  in this Chapter may be extended  by mutual  agreement  of the Parties  involved.

X FINAL CLAUSES
Article  67:  Transparency

1. The Parties shall publish their  laws, or otherwise  make publicly available their  laws, regulations  and administrative  rulings and judicial decisions of general application  as well as their respective  international  agreements  that  may affect  the operation  of  this
Agreement.

2. The Parties shall promptly  respond to specific  questions  and provide,  upon request, information  to each other  on matters  referred  to in paragraph 1 .

3. Nothing in this  Agreement shall require any Party to disclose  confidential information, which would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or would prejudice  the  legitimate  commercial  interests  of  any economic  operator.
Article  68:  Annexes and Appendices

The Annexes and Appendices to  this  Agreement  form  an integral  part  thereof. Article  69:  Amendments

1. Amendments  to  this  Agreement  shall, after  approval by the Joint  Committee,  be submitted  to  the Parties  for  ratification,  acceptance  or approval, subject  to  each Party's constitutional   requirements.

2. Unless the  Joint  Committee  decides otherwise,  the  amendments  shall enter  into  force on the first  day of the third  month  following  the deposit  of the last instrument  o f ratification,  acceptance  or  approval.

3. The text  of the  amendments  as well as the  instruments  of  ratification,  acceptance  or approval shall be deposited  with  the  Depositary.
Article  70:  Additional  Parties

Any third State  may become a Party  to  this Agreement.  The terms  and conditions  o f the participation by such third State shall be the subject of an agreement between the Parties and that  State.
Article  71:  Withdrawal  and Termination

1. Any Party may withdraw  therefrom  by means of a written  notification  to  the Depositary. The withdrawal  shall take effect  on the first  day of the  sixth month  after  the date on which the  notification  was received by the  Depositary.

2. If Singapore withdraws,  this  Agreement  shall expire on the  date specified  in paragraph 1. 
Article  72:  Entry into  Force

1. This Agreement  is subject  to  ratification,  acceptance  or approval. The instruments  o f ratification,  acceptance  or approval  shall be deposited  with  the  Depositary.

2. This Agreement  shall enter  into force  on 1 January 2003  in relation to  those Signatory States  which by then  have ratified  the Agreement,  provided  they  have deposited  their  instruments  of  ratification  or acceptance  with  the  Depositary  at  least two months  before  the entry  into  force,  and provided  that  Singapore is among the States that  have deposited  their  instruments  of  ratification  or acceptance.

3. In relation  to  a Signatory  State  depositing  its  instrument  of  ratification  or acceptance after  1 January 2003,  this Agreement  shall enter into  force on the first  day of the third month  following  the  deposit  of its instrument,  provided  that  in relation  to  the  Republic of Singapore this Agreement  enters  into  force  at the  latest  on the  same date.

4. Any Party may, if its constitutional  requirements  permit,  apply this Agreement provisionally during an initial period starting  on 1 January 2003.  Provisional application  o f this Agreement  shall be notified  to  the  Depositary.
Article  73:  Depositary

The Government of  Norway shall act  as Depositary.

