RECOGNISING the importance of enhancing the longstanding and strong friendship
between the Parties;

ACKNOWLEDGING the mutual desire of the Parties for a comprehensive economic
partnership covering trade in goods, trade in services, investments, and trade-related
areas;

REAFFIRMING the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic
Cooperation between the Eurasian Economic Union and its Member States, of the one
part, and the Republic of Singapore, of the other part, signed at Yerevan, on the first
day of October 2019;

DESIRING to eliminate barriers to trade in services and investment between the Parties,
lower business costs, enhance economic efficiency and create favourable conditions
for greater economic cooperation and mutual benefit;

RECOGNISING that the promotion and mutual protection of investments will be
conducive to stimulating business initiative and increasing prosperity in the Parties;
and

DESIRING to create favourable conditions for greater bilateral economic cooperation
and in particular for investments by investors of one State in the territory of the other

State based on the principles of equality and mutual benefit;

HAVE AGREED as follows:

CHAPTER 1
INITIAL PROVISIONS AND GENERAL DEFINITIONS

Article 1.1
Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties hereby establish a free trade area consistent with Article
V of GATS.

Article 1.2
Objectives

The objective of this Agreement is to liberalise and facilitate trade in
services and investment between the Parties in accordance with this Agreement,

Article 1.3
Definitions of General Application

For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:
"central level of government" means the national level of government;

"day" means a calendar day;

"enterprise" means an entity constituted or organised under applicable
law, whether or not for profit, and whether privately or governmentally owned
or controlled, including a corporation, trust, partnership, sole proprietorship,
joint venture, association, or similar organisation; and includes a branch of an
enterprise;

"enterprise of a Party" means an enterprise organised or constituted under
the laws of a Party, or a branch located in the territory of a Party and carrying out
business activities there;

"GATS" means the General Agreement on Trade in Services contained in
Annex 1B to the WTO Agreement;

"IME" means the International Monetary Fund;

"measure" means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a e law,
regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other form, and
includes measures taken by:

(a) central or local governments and authorities; and

(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by
central or local governments or authorities;

"national" means:

(a) with respect to Singapore, a citizen of Singapore within the meaning
of its Constitution and its domestic laws; and

(b) with respect to Armenia, a citizen of Armenia within the meaning of
its Constitution and its domestic laws;

"person" means a natural person or an enterprise;
"person of a Party" means a national or an enterprise of a Party;

"territory" means:

(a) with respect to Singapore, its land territory, internal waters and
territorial sea, including the airspace above them, as well as any
maritime area situated beyond the territorial sea which has been or
might in the future be designated under its national law, in
accordance with international law, as an area within which
Singapore may exercise rights with regard to the sea, the seabed, the
subsoil and the natural resources; and

(b) with respect to Armenia, its land territory, internal waters, subsoil
and airspace above them, over which Armenia exercises sovereign
rights and jurisdiction in accordance with its domestic laws and
international law;

"WTO Agreement" means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the
World Trade Organization done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994; and

"WTO" means the World Trade Organization.

CHAPTER 2
CROSS-BORDER TRADE IN SERVICES

Article 2.1
Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

"cross-border trade in services" or "cross-border supply of
services" means the supply of a service:

(a) from the territory of one Party into the territory of the other
Party;

(b) in the territory of one Party by a person of that Party to a
person of the other Party; or

(c) by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party;

but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by
an investor of the other Party or a covered investment as defined in

Article 3. I (Definitions); and

"service supplier" means a person of a Party that seeks to supply

or supplies a service, !

Article 2.2
Scope and Coverage

l. This Chapter shall apply to measures by a Party affecting cross-
border trade in services by service suppliers of the other Party. Such

measures include measures affecting:

(a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale and delivery of

a service:
(b) the purchase or use of, or payment for, a service;

' The Parties understand that "seeks to supply or supplies a service" has the same meaning
as "supplies a service" as used in paragraph (g) of GATS Article XXVIII. The Parties
understand that for the purposes of Articles 2.3 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), 2.4
(National Treatment) and 2.5 (Market Access), "service suppliers" has the same meaning as
"services and service suppliers" as used in GATS Articles Il, XVI, and X VIL

(c) the access to and use of distribution, transport, or
telecommunications networks and services in connection with the
supply of a service; and

(d) the provision of a bond or other form of financial security
as a condition for the supply of a service.

2. Articles 2.5 (Market Access) and 2.8 (Domestic Regulation) also
apply to measures by a Party affecting the supply of a service in its
territory by an investor of the other Party or by a covered investment as
defined in

Article 3.1 (Definitions).”

3. This Chapter shall not apply to:
(a) government procurement;

(b) air services, including domestic and international air
transportation services, whether scheduled or non-scheduled, or
related services in support of air services;

(c) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including
government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance; or any
conditions attached to the receipt or continued receipt of such
subsidies or grants, whether or not such subsidies or grants are
offered exclusively to domestic services, service consumers or
service suppliers; or

(d) services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority
within the territory of each Party.

4. For the purposes of this Chapter, a service supplied in the exercise
of governmental authority means any service which is supplied neither
on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or more service
suppliers.

5. This Chapter does not impose any obligation on a Party with
respect to a national of the other Party seeking access to its employment

? The Parties understand that nothing in this Chapter, including this paragraph, is subject to
investor-state dispute settlement pursuant to Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement)
of Chapter 3 (Investment).

3

market, or employed on a permanent basis in its territory, and does not
confer any right on that national with respect to that access or
employment, nor shall it apply to measures regarding citizenship or
residence on a permanent basis.

6. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from applying
measures to regulate the entry of natural persons of the other Party into,
or their temporary stay in, its territory, including those measures
necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly movement
of natural persons across, its borders, provided that such measures are
not applied in such a manner as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing
to the other Party under this Chapter’.

7. This Chapter shall not apply to financial services * and
telecommunications®. The Parties reaffirm their commitments under
GATS with respect to financial services and telecommunications.

Article 2.3
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

Each Party shall accord to service suppliers of the other Party
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances,
to service suppliers of a non-Party.

> The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons of certain countries and not for those
of others shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing benefits under this Agreement.

“ For the purposes of this paragraph, “financial services” is as defined in subparagraph 5(a)
of the Annex on Financial Services in GATs.

> For the purposes of this paragraph, "telecommunications" is as defined in subparagraph
3(a) of the Annex on Telecommunications in GATS.

2.4
National Treatment

Each Party shall accord to service suppliers of the other Party
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances,
to its own service suppliers.

Article 2.5
Market Access

A Party shall not adopt or maintain, either on the basis of a
regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory, measures that:

(a) limit the number of service suppliers whether in the form of
numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers
or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(b) limit the total value of service transactions or assets in the
form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic
needs test;

(c) limit the total number of service operations or the total
quantity of service output expressed in terms of designated
numerical units in the form of quotas or the requirement of
an economic needs test;°

(d) limit the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a particular service sector or that a service
supplier may employ' and who are necessary for, and
directly related to, the supply of a specific service in the
form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic
needs test; or

° This paragraph does not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of
services,

(e) restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint
venture through which a service supplier may supply a
service.

Article 2.6
Local Presence

A Party shall not require a service supplier of the other Party to
establish or maintain a representative office or any form of enterprise, or
to be resident, in its territory as a condition for the cross-border supply
of a service.

Article 2.7
Non-Conforming Measures

1. Articles 2.3 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), 2.4 (National
Treatment), 2.5 (Market Access), and 2.6 (Local Presence) shall not apply
to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a
Party as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming
measure referred to in subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a) to the extent that the amendment does not
decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed
immediately before the amendment, with Articles 2.3 (Most
Favoured-Nation Treatment), 2.4 (National Treatment). 2.5
(Market Access), and 2.6 (Local Presence).

2. Articles 2.3 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), 2.4 (National
Treatment), 2.5 (Market Access), and 2.6 (Local Presence) shall not apply

to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors,
subsectors or activities as set out in its Schedule to Annex II.

Article 2.8
Domestic Regulation

l. Each Party shall ensure that all measures of general application
affecting trade in services are administered in a reasonable, objective and
impartial manner.

2. Where a Party requires authorisation for the supply of a service, the

Party's competent authorities shall, within a reasonable period of time
after the submission of an application considered complete under
domestic laws and regulations, inform the applicant of the decision
concerning the application. At the request of the applicant, the competent
authorities of the Party shall provide, without undue delay, information
concerning the status of the application. This obligation shall not apply to
authorisation requirements that are within the scope of paragraph 2 of
Article 2.7 (Non-Conforming Measures).

3. With a view to ensuring that measures relating to qualification
requirements and procedures, technical standards and _ licensing
requirements do not constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in services,
each Party shall endeavour to ensure, as appropriate for individual sectors,
that such measures are:

(a) based on objective and transparent criteria, such as
competence and the ability to supply the service;

(b) not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of
the service; and

(c) _in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves a
restriction on the supply of the service.

4. If the results of the negotiations related to paragraph 4 of Article VI
of GATS (or the results of any similar negotiations undertaken in other
multilateral fora in which both Parties participate) enter into effect, this
Article shall be amended, as appropriate, after consultations between the
Parties, to bring those results into effect under this Agreement.

Article 2.9
Recognition

1. For the purposes of the fulfilment, in whole or in part, of a Party's
standards or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or certification of service
suppliers, and subject to the requirements of paragraph 4, it may recognise the
education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications
granted in a particular country, including the other Party or non-Parties. Such
recognition, which may be achieved through harmonisation or otherwise, may
be based upon an agreement or arrangement with the Party or non-Party
concerned or may be accorded autonomously.

2. Where a Party recognises, autonomously or by agreement or arrangement,
the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or
certifications granted in the territory of a non-Party, nothing in Article 2.3 (Most-
Favoured-Nation Treatment) shall be construed to require the Party to accord
such recognition to the education or experience obtained, requirements met or
licences or certifications granted in the territory of the other Party.

3. A Party that is a party to an agreement or arrangement of the type referred
to in paragraph |, whether existing or future, shall afford adequate opportunity to
the other Party, if the other Party is interested, to negotiate its accession to such
an agreement or arrangement or to negotiate comparable ones with it. Where a
Party accords recognition autonomously, it shall afford adequate opportunity to
the other Party to demonstrate that education, experience, licences, or
certifications obtained or requirements met in that other Party's territory should
be recognised.

4. A Party shall not accord recognition in a manner which would constitute
a means of discrimination between countries in the application of its standards
or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or certification of services suppliers, or
a disguised restriction on trade in services.

Article 2.10
Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers

1. Each Party shall ensure that any monopoly supplier of a service in its
territory does not, in the supply of the monopoly service in the relevant market,
act in a manner inconsistent with that Party's obligations under Articles 2.3
(Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), 2.4 (National Treatment), 2.5 (Market
Access), and 2.6 (Local Presence).

2. Where a Party's monopoly supplier competes, either directly or through an
affiliated company, in the supply of a service outside the scope of its monopoly
rights and which is subject to that Party's obligations under Articles 2.3 (Most-
Favoured-Nation Treatment), 2.4 (National Treatment), 2.5 (Market Access) and
2.6 (Local Presence), the Party shall ensure that such a supplier does not abuse
its monopoly position to act in its territory in a manner inconsistent with such
commitments.

3. If a Party has reason to believe that a monopoly supplier of a service of
the other Party is acting in a manner inconsistent with paragraphs I or 2, it may
request the other Party establishing, maintaining or authorising such supplier to
provide specific information concerning the relevant operations.

4. This Article shall also apply to cases of exclusive service suppliers, where
a Party, formally or in effect:

(a) authorises or establishes a small number of service suppliers; and

(b) substantially prevents competition among those suppliers in its
territory.

Article 2.11
Safeguard Measures

Neither Party shall take safeguard action against services and service
suppliers of the other Party from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Neither Party shall initiate or continue any safeguard investigations in respect of
services and service suppliers of the other Party.

Article 2.12
Transfers and Payments

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers and payments relating to the crosse
border supply of services to be made freely and without delay into and out of its
territory.

2. Each Party shall permit such transfers and payments relating to the cross-
border supply of services to be made in a freely usable currency at the market
rate of exchange prevailing on the date of transfer.

10

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs | and 2, a Party may prevent or delay a
transfer or payment through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith
application of its laws relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency or the protection of the rights of creditors;

(b) issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options, or
derivatives;

(c) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to
assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;

(d) criminal or penal offences;

(e) ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or
administrative proceedings; or

(f) social security, public retirement or compulsory savings schemes.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the
members of the IMF under its Articles of Agreement, including the use of
exchange actions which are in conformity with the said Articles of Agreement,
provided that a Party shall not impose restrictions on any capital transactions
inconsistently with its obligations under this Chapter regarding such
transactions, except under Article 6.7 (Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of
Payments) or at the request of the IMF.

Article 2.13
Denial of Benefits

A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of the
other Party if the service is being supplied by an enterprise that has no substantial
business activities in the territory of the other Party and it is owned or controlled
by persons of a non-Party or the denying Party.

Article 2.14
General Exceptions

11

Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner
which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination
against the other Party, or a disguised restriction on trade in services, nothing in
this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by a Party

of measures:

(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

necessary to protect public morals or to maintain public order;’
necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter including those
relating to:

(1) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal
with the effects of a default on services contracts;

(11) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the
processing and dissemination of personal data and the protection
of confidentiality of individual records and accounts;

(ii1) safety;

inconsistent with Article 2.4 (National Treatment), provided that
the difference in treatment is aimed at ensuring the equitable or
effective® imposition or collection of direct taxes in respect of
services or service suppliers of the other Party.

’ The public order exception may be invoked only where a genuine and sufficiently serious threat is
posed to one of the fundamental interests of society,

’ Measures that are aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or collection of direct taxes
include measures taken by a Party under its taxation system which:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

apply to non-resident service suppliers in recognition of the fact that the tax obligation
of non-residents is determined with respect to taxable items sourced or located in the
Party's territory; or

apply to non-residents in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes in the
Party's territory; or

apply to non-residents or residents in order to prevent the avoidance or evasion of taxes,
including compliance measures: or

12

(iv) apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the territory of the other Party in
order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes on such consumers derived from
sources in the Party's territory; or

(v) distinguish service suppliers subject to tax on worldwide taxable items from other
service suppliers. in recognition of the difference in the nature of the tax base between
them; or

(vi) | determine, allocate or apportion income. profit, gain, loss. deduction or credit of
resident persons or branches, or between related persons or branches of the same person,
in order to safeguard the Party's tax base.

Tax terms or concepts in subparagraph (d) of Article 2.14 (General Exceptions) and in this footnote
are determined according to tax definitions and concepts, or equivalent or similar definitions and
concepts, under the domestic law of the Party taking the measure.

CHAPTER 3
INVESTMENT

Article 3.1
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

“claimant” means an investor of a Party that is a party to an investment
dispute with the other Party;

“covered investment” means, with respect to a Party, an investment in
its territory of an investor of the other Party in existence as of the date of entry
into force of this Agreement or established, acquired, or expanded thereafter;

“disputing parties” means the claimant and the respondent;
“disputing party” means either the claimant or the respondent;

“freely usable currency” means “freely usable currency” as determined
by the IMF under its Articles of Agreement and any amendments thereto;

“ICSID Additional Facility Rules” means the Rules Governing the
Additional Facility for the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of
the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes;

“ICSID Arbitration Rules” means the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (Arbitration Rules) as amended and in effect on 10 April 2006;

“ICSID Convention” means the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, done at
Washington, 18 March 1965;

“investment” means every kind of asset, owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an investor, that has the characteristics of an investment!, Forms
that an investment may take include:?

' Where an asset lacks the characteristics of an investment, that asset is not an investment regardless
of the form it may take. The characteristics of an investment include the commitment of capital, the
expectation of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk.

* The term "investment" does not include an order or judgment entered in a judicial or administrative
action.

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)

(f)

(g)
(h)

(i)

an enterprise;

shares, stock, and other forms of equity participation in an enterprise,
including rights derived therefrom;

bonds, debentures, loans and other debt instruments*, including
rights derived therefrom;

futures, options, and other derivatives;

turnkey, construction, management, production, concession,
revenue-sharing, and other similar contracts;

claims to money or to any contractual performance related to a
business and having an economic value;

intellectual property rights and goodwill;
licences, authorisations, permits, and similar rights conferred

pursuant to applicable domestic law, including any concession to
search for, cultivate, extract or exploit natural resources; and

other tangible or intangible, movable or immovable property, and
related property rights, such as leases, mortgages, liens, and pledges;

“investor of a Party” means a national or an enterprise of a Party, that
attempts to make, is making, or has made an investment in the territory of the

other Party;

“New York Convention” means the Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, adopted at the United Nations in New
York on 10 June 1958;

“respondent” means the Party that is a party to an investment

dispute;

“return” means an amount yielded by or derived from an investment,
including profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, payments

> For the purpose of this Agreement, “loans and other debt instruments” described in (c) and “claims to
money or to any contractual performance” described in (f) of this Article refer to assets which relate to
a business activity and do not refer to assets which are of a personal nature, unrelated to any business

activity.

in connection with intellectual property rights, and all other lawful income. For
the purposes of the definition of "investment", returns that are invested shall be
treated as investments and any alteration of the form in which assets are
invested or reinvested shall not affect their character as investments; and

“UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules” means the arbitration rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, as adopted by the
United Nations General Assembly on 15 December 1976.

Section A: Investment

Article 3.2
Scope*

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party
relating to:

(a) investors of the other Party;

(b) covered investments; and

(c) with respect to Article 3.8 (Performance Requirements), all
investments in the territory of the Party.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to:
(a) any taxation measure unless otherwise provided;

(b) services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority within
the territory of the respective Party. For purposes of this Chapter, a
service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means
any service which is supplied neither on a commercial basis, nor in
competition with one or more service suppliers; or

(c) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-
supported loans, guarantees, and insurance, or any conditions

“For greater certainty, this Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking
access to the employment market of either Party, nor shall it apply to measures regarding citizenship,
residence or employment on a permanent basis. This Chapter shall not prevent either Party from
applying measures to regulate the entry of natural persons into, or their temporary stay in, its territory.

attached to the receipt or continued receipt of such subsidies or
grants, whether or not such subsidies or grants are offered
exclusively to investors of the Party or investments of investors of
the Party, including government supported loans, guarantees and
insurance.

3. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another
Chapter, the other Chapter shall prevail over this Chapter to the extent of the
inconsistency.

4. The requirement by a Party that a service provider of the other Party post
a bond or other form of financial security as a condition of providing a service
into its territory does not of itself make this Chapter applicable to the provision
of that cross-border service. This Chapter applies to that Party's treatment of the
posted bond or financial security, to the extent that such bond or financial
security 1s a covered investment.

5. For greater certainty, this Chapter does not impose any obligation on
either Party in relation to any act or fact that took place or any situation that
ceased to exist before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 3.3
Financial Services> and Telecommunications®

I. This Chapter shall not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party
in respect of:

(a) investors of the other Party, and covered investments of such
investors in the financial institutions’ in the former Party; and

(b) investors of the other Party, and covered investments of such

investors relating to telecommunications,

except for the following provisions:

> For purposes of this Chapter, “financial services” is as defined in subparagraph 5(a) of the Annex on
Financial Services in GATS.

° For purposes of this Chapter, “telecommunications” is as defined in subparagraph 3(a) of the Annex
on Telecommunication in GATS.

7 “Financial institution” means any financial intermediary or other enterprise that is authorised to do
business and regulated or supervised as a financial institution under the law of the Party in whose
territory it is located.

Article 3.7 (Compensation for Losses);

Article 3.9 (Senior Management and Board of Directors);
Article 3.1 1 (Expropriation);

Article 3.12 (Transfers);

Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement); and
Article 3.24 (Denial of Benefits).

2. The Parties reaffirm their commitments under GATS with respect to
financial services and telecommunications.

3. For the purposes of paragraph I, Section B (Investor-State Dispute
Settlement) shall apply solely for claims that a Party has breached Articles 3.11
(Expropriation), 3.12 (Transfers). and 3.24 (Denial of Benefits).

4. This Chapter shall not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party
relating to:

(a) activities or services forming part of a public retirement plan or
statutory system of social security;

(b) activities or services conducted for the account or with the guarantee
or using the financial resources of the Party, including its public
entities; or

(c) activities conducted by a central bank or monetary authority or by
any other public entity in pursuit of monetary or exchange rate
policies;

except that the provisions referred to in paragraph | shall apply if a Party allows
any of the activities or services referred to in subparagraph (a) or (b) to be
conducted by its financial institutions in competition with a public entity or a
financial institution.

5. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, each Party may
adopt or maintain measures for prudential reasons, such as: the protection of
investors, depositors, policy-holders or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed
by a financial institution or financial services supplier; the maintenance of the

safety, soundness, integrity or financial responsibility of financial services
suppliers; and ensuring the integrity and stability of a Party's financial system.
Such measures shall not be used as a means of avoiding a Party's obligations
under the provisions referred to in paragraph 1.

6. Notwithstanding Article 3.12 (Transfers), a Party may prevent or limit
transfers by a financial institution or financial services supplier to, or for the
benefit of, an affiliate of or a person related to such institution or supplier,
through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith application of
measures relating to maintenance of the safety, soundness, integrity, or financial
responsibility of financial institutions or financial services suppliers. This
paragraph does not prejudice any other provision of this Agreement that permits
a Party to restrict transfers.

7. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the adoption or
enforcement by any Party of measures necessary to secure compliance with laws
or regulations that are not inconsistent with this Chapter, including those relating
to the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with the effects
of a default on financial services contracts, subject to the requirement that such
measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary
or unjustifiable discrimination between e countries where like conditions prevail,
or a disguised restriction on investment in financial institutions.

8. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party to disclose
information relating to the affairs and accounts of individual consumers or any
confidential or proprietary information in the possession of public entities.

Article 3.4
Minimum Standard of Treatment

l. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment in accordance
with the international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens,® including
fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security.

2. For greater certainty, paragraph I prescribes the international law
minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the minimum standard of treatment

8 For the purposes of this article. international law refers to the law that results from a general and
consistent practice of States that they follow from a sense of legal obligation. With regard to this article,
the international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens refers to all international law principles
that protect the economic rights and interests of aliens.

to be afforded to covered investments. The concepts of "fair and equitable
treatment" and "full protection and security" do not require treatment in addition
to or beyond that which is required by that standard, and do not create additional
substantive rights.

(a) The obligation to provide "fair and equitable treatment" includes
the obligation not to deny justice in criminal, civil or administrative
adjudicatory proceedings in accordance with the principle of due
process embodied in the principal legal systems of the world.

(b) The obligation to provide "full protection and security" requires
each Party to provide the level of police protection required under
international law.

3. A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of this
Agreement, or of a separate international agreement, does not establish that there
has been a breach of this Article.

Article 3.5
National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with
respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct,
operation, and sale or other disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments in its
territory of its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of
investments.

Article 3.6
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors of any non-
Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management,
conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments in its
territory of investors of any non-Party with respect to the establishment,
acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other
disposition of investments.

3. For greater certainty, paragraphs | and 2 shall not be construed as granting
to investors options or procedures for the settlement of disputes other than those
set out in Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement).

Article 3.7
Compensation for Losses

l. Investors of one Party whose covered investments in the territory of the
other Party suffer losses owing to war or other armed conflict, revolution, a state
of national emergency, insurrection, riot, or any other similar event in the
territory of the latter Party, shall be accorded by the latter Party treatment, as
regards restitution, indemnification, compensation or other settlement, no less
favourable than that which the latter Party accords to investments of its own
investors or investments of investors of any non-Party, whichever is more
favourable, to the covered investment of the investor of the former Party. All
payments that may result shall be deemed freely transferable.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if an investor of a Party, in the situations
referred to in paragraph |, suffers a loss in the territory of the other Party resulting
from:

(a) requisitioning of its covered investment or part thereof by the
latter's forces or authorities; or

(b) destruction of its covered investment or part thereof by the latter's
forces or authorities, which was not required by the necessity of the
situation,

the latter Party shall provide the investor restitution, compensation, or both, as

appropriate, for such loss.

Article 3.8
Performance Requirements

I. Neither Party may, in connection with the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, management, conduct, operation, or sale or other disposition of an
investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in its territory, impose or
enforce any requirement or enforce any commitment or undertaking: ”

(a) to export a given level or percentage of goods or services;
(b) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

(c) to purchase, use, or accord a preference to goods produced in its
territory, or to purchase goods from persons in its territory;

(d) to relate, in any way, the volume or value of imports to the volume
or value of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows
associated with such investment;

(e) to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that such
investment produces or supplies by relating such sales in any way
to the volume or value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings;

(f) to transfer a particular technology, a production process, or other
proprietary knowledge to a person in its territory; or

(g) to supply exclusively from the territory of the Party the goods that
such investment produces or the services that it supplies to a specific
regional market or to the world market.

2. Neither Party may condition the receipt or continued receipt of an
advantage, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conducts operation, or sale or other disposition of an investment in
its territory of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party, on compliance with any
requirement:

(a) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

(b) to purchase, use, or accord a preference to goods produced in its
territory, or to purchase goods from persons In its territory;

’ For greater certainty, a condition for the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage referred to in
paragraph 2 does not constitute a "requirement" or a "commitment or undertaking" for the purposes
of paragraph 1.

(c)

(d)

3. (a)

10

to relate, in any way, the volume or value of imports to the volume
or value of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows
associated with such investment; or

to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that such
investment produces or supplies by relating such sales in any way
to the volume or value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings.

For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 1 shall be construed to

prevent a Party from, in connection with the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, management, conduct, operation or sale or other disposition of an
investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in its territory, imposing or
enforcing a requirement or enforcing a commitment or undertaking to employ or
train workers in its territory, provided that such employment or training does not
require the transfer of a particular technology, production process, or other
proprietary Knowledge to a person in its territory.

(b)

(c)

For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 2 shall be construed to
prevent a Party from conditioning the receipt or continued receipt
of an advantage, in connection with an investment in its territory of
an investor of a Party or of a non-Party, on compliance with a
requirement to locate production, supply a service, employ or train
workers, construct or expand particular facilities, or carry out
research and development, in its territory.

The provisions of subparagraph 1(f) shall not apply when:

(i) a Party authorises use of an intellectual property right in
accordance with Article 31!° of the Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights in Annex 1C to the WTO
Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "TRIPS Agreement"), or
to measures requiring the disclosure of proprietary information
that fall within the scope of, and are consistent with, Article 39
of the TRIPS Agreement; or

(ii) the requirement is imposed or the commitment or undertaking 1s
enforced by a court, administrative tribunal, or competition
authority to remedy a practice determined after judicial or

10 The reference to “Article 31” includes footnote 7 to Article 31.

11

administrative process to be anti-competitive under the Party's
competition laws!!.

(d) Subparagraphs l(a), 1(b), 1(c), 2(a) and 2(b) shall not apply to
qualification requirements for goods or services with respect to export
promotion and foreign aid programs.

(e) Subparagraphs 1(b), 1(c), 1(f), 1(g), 2(a) and 2(b) shall not apply to
government procurement.

(f) Subparagraphs 2(a) and 2(b) shall not apply 10 requirements
imposed by an importing Party relating to the content of goods necessary
to qualify for preferential tariffs or preferential quotas.

4. For greater certainty, paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to any
commitment, undertaking, or requirement other than those set out in those
paragraphs.

5. This Article does not preclude enforcement of any commitment,
undertaking, or requirement between private parties, where a Party did not
impose or require the commitment, undertaking, or requirement.

Article 3.9
Senior Management and Boards of Directors

l. Neither Party may require that an enterprise of that Party that is a covered
investment appoint to senior management positions natural persons of any
particular nationality.

2. A Party may require that a majority of the board of directors, or any
committee thereof, of an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment, be
of a particular nationality, or resident in the territory of the Party, provided that
the requirement does not materially impair the ability of the investor of the other
Party to exercise control over its investment.

Article 3.10
Non-Conforming Measures

'l The Parties note that a patent does not necessarily confer market power.

12

1. Articles 3.5 (National Treatment), 3.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment),
3.8 (Performance Requirements) and 3.9 (Senior Management and Board of
Directors) shall not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party
as set out in its Schedule to Annex I;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure
referred to in subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a) to the extent that the amendment does not decrease
the conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the
amendment, with Articles 3.5 (National Treatment), 3.6 (Most-
Favoured-Nation Treatment), 3.8 (Performance Requirements) and
3.9 (Senior Management and Board of Directors).

2. Articles 3.5 (National Treatment), 3.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment),
3.8 (Performance Requirements) and 3.9 (Senior Management and Board of
Directors) shall not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with
respect to sectors, subsectors, or activities, as set out in its Schedule to Annex II.

3. Neither Party may, under any measure adopted after the date of entry into
force of this Agreement and covered by its Schedule to Annex Il, require an
investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise
dispose of an investment existing at the time the measure becomes effective.

4. Articles 3.5 (National Treatment) and 3.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment) shall not apply to any measure that is an exception to, or derogation
from, a Party's obligations under the TRIPS Agreement, as specifically provided
for in that Agreement.

5. Articles 3.5 (National Treatment), 3.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment)
and 3.9 (Senior Management and Board of Directors) shall not apply to
government procurement.

Article 3.11
Expropriation”

"2 Article 3.11 (Expropriation) is to be interpreted in accordance with Annex 3-A (Expropriation).

13

l. Neither Party shall nationalise, expropriate or subject to measures having
effect equivalent to nationalisation or expropriation (hereinafter referred to as
"expropriation") a covered investment, unless such a measure is taken on a non-
discriminatory basis, for a public purpose, in accordance with due process of law,
and upon payment of compensation in accordance with this Article.

2. The expropriation shall be accompanied by the payment of prompt (with
respect to Singapore), and the payment of prior (with respect to Armenia),
adequate and effective compensation. Compensation shall be equivalent to the
fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the
expropriation or impending expropriation became public knowledge. Such
compensation shall be effectively realisable, freely transferable in accordance
with Article 3.12 (Transfers) and made without delay. The compensation shall
include interest at a commercially reasonable rate for that currency, accrued from
the date of expropriation until the date of payment.

3. For Singapore, notwithstanding paragraphs I and 2, any measure of
expropriation relating to land, which shall be as defined in its existing domestic
legislation on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, shall be for a purpose
and upon payment of compensation in accordance with the aforesaid legislation.

4. This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licences granted
in relation to intellectual property rights in accordance with the TRIPS
Agreement, or to the revocation, limitation, or creation of intellectual property
rights, to the extent that such issuance, revocations limitation, or creation is
consistent with the TRIPS Agreement."

Article 3.12
Transfers

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers relating to a covered investment to be
made freely and without delay into and out of its territory. Such transfers include:

(a) contributions to capital, including the initial contribution;
'3 For greater certainty, the Parties recognise that, for the purposes of this Article, the term “revocation”

of intellectual property rights includes the cancellation of nullification of such rights, and the term
“limitation” of intellectual property rights includes exceptions to such rights.

14

(b) profits, dividends, capital gains, and proceeds from the sale of all
or any part of the investment or from the partial or complete
liquidation of the investment;

(c) interest, royalty payments, management fees, and _ technical
assistance and other fees;

(d) payments made under a contract entered into by the investor, or its
investment, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;

(e) payments made pursuant to Article 3.7 (Compensation for Losses)
and Article 3.1 1 (Expropriation); and

(f) payments arising under Section B_ (Investor-State Dispute
Settlement).

2. Each Party shall permit such transfers to be made in a freely usable

currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing at the time of transfer.

3. Each Party shall permit returns in kind relating to a covered investment to
be made as authorised or specified in a written agreement between the Party and
a covered investment or an investor of the other Party.

4. Notwithstanding paragraphs |, 2, and 3, a Party may delay or prevent a
transfer through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith application of
its laws relating to:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)

(f)

bankruptcy, insolvency, or the protection of the rights of creditors;

issuing, trading, or dealing in securities, futures, options, or
derivatives;

financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to

assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;
criminal or penal offences;

ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or

administrative proceedings; or

social security, public retirement or compulsory savings schemes.

15

5. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the
members of the IMF under its Articles of Agreement, including 'the use of
exchange actions which are consistent with the said Articles of Agreement,
provided that a Party shall not impose restrictions on any capital transactions
inconsistently with its obligations under this Chapter regarding such transactions,
except under Article 6.7 (Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of Payments) or
at the request of the IMF.

Article 3.13
Subrogation

l. If a Party (or any agency, institution, statutory body or corporation
designated by it) makes a payment to any of its investors under a guarantee, a
contract of insurance or other form of indemnity it has granted in respect of a
covered investment, the other Party shall recognise the subrogation or transfer of
any right or title in respect of such investment. The subrogated or transferred
right or claim shall not be greater than the original right or claim of the investor.

2. Where a Party (or any agency, institution, statutory body or corporation
designated by it) has made a payment to an investor of that Party and has taken
over rights and claims of the investor, that investor shall not, unless authorised
to act on behalf of the Party or the designated agency of the Party making the
payment, pursue those rights and claims against the other Party.

Section B: Investor-State Dispute Settlement

Article 3.14
Scope

l. This Section shall apply to disputes between a Party and an investor of the
other Party concerning an alleged breach of an obligation of the former under
this Chapter which causes loss or damage to the investor or its covered
investment.

16

2. This Section shall not apply to any dispute concerning any measure
adopted or maintained or any treatment accorded to investors or investments by
a Party in respect of tobacco or tobacco-related products !*.

Article 3.15
Institution of Arbitral Proceedings

1. The disputing parties shall initially seek to resolve the dispute by
consultations and negotiations.

2. Where the dispute cannot be resolved as provided for under paragraph I
within 6 months from the date of a written request for consultations and
negotiations, the claimant may submit to arbitration:

(a) a claim, on its own behalf, that the respondent has breached an
obligation under this Agreement and the claimant has incurred loss
or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach; or

(b) a claim, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is an
enterprise that the claimant owns or controls!***, either directly or
indirectly, that the respondent has breached an obligation under this
Agreement and the enterprise has incurred loss or damage by reason
of, or arising out of, that breach.

3. A claimant may submit the claim to arbitration:

(a) under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
provided that both Parties are parties to the ICSID Convention;

'4 For the purpose of this Chapter, "tobacco or tobacco-related products" means products under
Harmonised System Chapter 24 (Tobacco and Manufactured Tobacco Substitutes) and tobacco-related
products falling outside Harmonised System Chapter 24 (Tobacco and Manufactured Tobacco
Substitutes).
'S An enterprise is:
(a) owned by natural persons or enterprises of the other Party if more than 50 per cent of the
equity interest in it is beneficially owned by natural persons or enterprises of that Party;
(b) controlled by natural persons or enterprises of the other Party if such natural persons or
enterprises have the power to name a majority of its directors or otherwise to legally direct its
actions.

17

(b) under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that one of the
Parties, but not both, is a party to the ICSID Convention;
(c) under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; or
(d) to any other arbitral institutions or under any other arbitration rules,
if the disputing parties so agree.
4. Each Party hereby consents to the submission of a dispute to arbitration

under paragraph 3 in accordance with the provisions of this Section, conditional

upon:

(a)

the submission of the dispute to such arbitration taking place within

three years of the time at which the claimant became aware, or should
reasonably have become aware, of a breach of an obligation under this
Agreement causing loss or damage to the claimant or its investment;

(b)

(c)

(d)

the claimant not being an enterprise of the respondent until the
claimant refers the dispute for arbitration pursuant to paragraph 3;

the claimant providing written consent to arbitration in accordance
with the provisions set out in this Section; and

the claimant providing written notice, which shall be delivered at
least ninety (90) days before the claim is submitted, to the
respondent of its intent to submit the dispute to such arbitration and
which:

(i) states the name and address of the claimant and, where a

dispute is submitted on behalf of an enterprise, the name,
address, and place of constitution of the enterprise;

(ii) nominates one of the fora referred to in paragraph 3 as the
forum for dispute settlement;

(ii1) is accompanied,

18

(A) for claims submitted to arbitration under
subparagraph 2(a), by the claimant's written waiver;
and

(B) for claims submitted to arbitration under
subparagraph 2(b), by the claimant's and _ the
enterprise's written waivers;

of any right to initiate or continue any proceedings
(excluding proceedings for interim measures of
protection referred to in paragraph I of Article 3.20
(Interim Measures of Protection and Diplomatic
Protection)) before any of the other dispute settlement
fora referred to in paragraph 3 in relation to the matter
under dispute; and

(iv) briefly summarises the alleged breach of the
respondent under this Agreement (including the provisions
alleged to have been breached), the legal and factual basis for
the dispute, and the loss or damage allegedly caused to the
claimant or its investment by reason of that breach.

5. Upon request of the respondent, the tribunal shall decline jurisdiction
where the claimant fails to respect any of the requirements referred to in
paragraph 4.

6. The consent under paragraph 4 and the submission of a claim to arbitration
under this Section shall satisfy the requirements of:

(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and the
ICSID Additional Facility Rules for written consent of the parties to
the dispute; and

(b) Article II of the New York Convention for an "agreement in writing".
7. A claim that is submitted for arbitration under this Section shall be
considered to arise out of a commercial relationship or transaction for purposes

of Article I of the New York Convention.

Article 3.16
Constitution of Arbitral Tribunal

19

I. Unless the disputing parties otherwise agree, the arbitral tribunal shall be
composed of three arbitrators who shall not be nationals or permanent residents
of either Party. Each disputing party shall appoint one arbitrator and the disputing
parties shall agree upon a third arbitrator, who shall be the chairman of the
arbitral tribunal. If an arbitral tribunal has not been established within ninety (90)
days from the date on which the claim was submitted to arbitration, either
because a disputing party failed to appoint an arbitrator or because the disputing
parties failed to agree upon the chairman. the Secretary-General of ICSID, upon
request of either disputing party, shall appoint, at his own discretion, the
arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, in the event that the Secretary-General of
ICSID is a national or permanent resident of either Party, or he or she is otherwise
unable to act, the Deputy Secretary-General of ICSID or the officer next in
seniority who is not a national or permanent resident of either Party shall be
requested to make the necessary appointment or appointments.

3. The arbitrators shall:

(a) have experience or expertise in public international law or
international investment law; and

(b) be independent from the Parties and the disputing investor, and not be
affiliated to or receive instructions from any of them.

Article 3.17
Rules of Interpretation

The Parties may adopt interpretations of provisions of this Agreement. A
joint decision of the Parties on the interpretation of a provision of this
Agreement shall be binding on the tribunal, and any decision or award issued
by the tribunal must be consistent with that joint decision.

Article 3.18
Place of Arbitration

Unless the disputing parties otherwise agree, the tribunal shall determine
the place of arbitration in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules,
provided that the place shall be in the territory of a State that is a party to the
New York Convention.

20

Article 3.19
Conduct of the Arbitration

I. A tribunal established under this Section shall decide the issues in dispute
in accordance with this Agreement and the applicable rules and principles of
international law.

2. Without prejudice to a tribunal's authority to address other objections as a
preliminary question, such as an objection that a dispute is not within the
competence of the tribunal, including an objection to the tribunal's jurisdiction,
a tribunal shall address and decide as a preliminary question any objection by the
respondent that. as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an
award in favour of the claimant may be made under Article 3.21 (Award).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Such objection shall be submitted to the tribunal as soon as possible
after the tribunal is constituted, and in no event later than the date
the tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its counter-memorial
(or, in the case of an amendment to the notice of arbitration. the date
the tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its response to the
amendment).

On receipt of an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall
suspend any proceedings on the merits, establish a schedule for
considering the objection consistent with any schedule it has
established for considering any other preliminary question, and
issue a decision or award on the objection, stating the grounds
therefor.

In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall
assume to be true the claimant's factual allegations in support of any
claim in the notice of arbitration (or any amendment thereof) and,
in disputes brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the
statement of claim referred to in the relevant article of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The tribunal may also consider any
relevant facts not in dispute.

The respondent does not waive any objection as to competence or
any argument on the merits merely because the respondent did or
did not raise an objection under this paragraph or make use of the
expedited procedure set out in paragraph 3.

21

3. In the event that the respondent so requests within forty-five (45) days
after the tribunal is constituted, the tribunal shall decide on an expedited basis an
objection under paragraph 2 or any objection that the dispute is not within the
tribunal's competence, including an objection that the dispute is not within the
tribunal's jurisdiction. The tribunal shall suspend any proceedings on the merits
and issue a decision or award on the objection(s), stating the grounds therefor,
no later than one hundred and fifty (150) days after the date of the request.
However, if a disputing party requests a hearing, the tribunal may take an
additional thirty (30) days to issue the decision or award. Regardless of whether
a hearing is requested, a tribunal may, on a showing of extraordinary cause, delay
issuing its decision or award by an additional brief period, which may not exceed
thirty (30) days.

4. When deciding a respondent's objection under paragraphs 2 or 3, the
tribunal may, if warranted, award to the prevailing disputing party reasonable
costs and attorney's fees incurred in submitting or opposing the objection. In
determining whether such an award is warranted, the tribunal shall consider
whether either the claimant's claim or the respondent's objection was frivolous,
and shall provide the disputing parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.

Article 3.20
Interim Measures of Protection and Diplomatic Protection

1. Subparagraph 4(d)(ii1) of Article 3.15 (Institution of Arbitral Proceedings)
shall not prevent the claimant from seeking interim measures of protection, not
involving the payment of damages or resolution of the substance of the matter in
dispute before the courts or administrative tribunals of the respondent, prior to
the institution of proceedings before any of the dispute settlement fora referred
to in paragraph 3 of Article 3, 15 (Institution of Arbitral Proceedings), for the
preservation of its rights and interests.

2. Neither Party shall give diplomatic protection, or bring an international
claim, in respect of a dispute which one of its investors and the other Party shall
have consented to submit or have submitted to arbitration under this Section,
unless such other Party has failed to abide by and comply with the award
rendered in such dispute. Diplomatic protection, for the purposes of this
paragraph, shall not include informal diplomatic exchanges for the sole purpose
of facilitating a settlement of the dispute.

Article 3.21
Award

22

I. Where a tribunal makes a final award against a respondent, the tribunal
may award, separately or in combination, only:

(a) monetary damages and any applicable interest; and

(b) restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that
the respondent may pay monetary damages and any applicable
interest in lieu of restitution.

A tribunal may also award costs and attorney's fees in accordance with this
Section and the applicable arbitration rules.

2. Any arbitral award shall be final and binding upon the disputing parties.
Each Party shall ensure the recognition and enforcement of the award in
accordance with its relevant laws and regulations.

3. Where a claim is submitted on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent,
the arbitral award shall be made to the enterprise.

4. In any arbitration conducted under this Section, at the request of a
disputing party, a tribunal shall, before issuing a decision or award on liability,
transmit its proposed decision or award to the disputing parties. Within sixty (60)
days after the tribunal transmits its proposed decision or award, the disputing
parties may submit written comments to the tribunal concerning any aspect of
the proposed decision or award, The tribunal shall consider any such comments
and issue its decision or award not later than forty-five (45) days after the
expiration of the sixty (60)-day comment period.

Article 3.22
Costs

1. The tribunal shall order that the costs of the proceedings be borne by the
unsuccessful disputing party. In exceptional circumstances, the tribunal may
apportion costs between the disputing parties if it determines that apportionment
is appropriate in the circumstances of the case.

2. Other reasonable costs, including costs of legal representation and
assistance, shall be borne by the unsuccessful disputing party, unless the tribunal
determines that such apportionment is unreasonable in the circumstances of the
case.

23

3. If only parts of the claims have been successful, the costs awarded shall
be adjusted, proportionately, to the number or extent of the successful parts of
the claims.

4. Upon request, the tribunal may order the claimant to post security for all
or a part of the costs, if there are reasonable grounds to believe that the claimant
risks not being able to honour a possible decision on costs issued against it.

5. If the security for costs is not posted in full within thirty (3()) days after
the tribunal's order or within any other time period set by the tribunal, the tribunal
shall so inform the disputing parties, The tribunal may order the suspension or
termination of the proceedings.

Article 3.23
Consolidation

I. Where two or more claims have been submitted separately to arbitration
under this Section, and the claims have a question of law or fact in common and
arise out of the same events or circumstances, any disputing party may seek a
consolidation order, in accordance with the agreement of all the disputing parties
sought to be covered by the order or the terms of this Article.

2. A disputing party that seeks a consolidation order under this Article shall
deliver, in writing, a request to the Secretary-General of ICSID and to all the
disputing parties sought to be covered by the order, specifying the name and
address of all the disputing parties sought to be covered by the order; the nature
of the order sought; and the grounds on which the order is sought.

3. Unless the Secretary-General of ICSID finds within thirty (30) days after

receiving a request in conformity with paragraph 2 that the request is manifestly
unfounded, a tribunal shall be established under this Article.

4. Unless all the disputing parties sought to be covered by the consolidation
order otherwise agree, the tribunal established under this Article shall comprise
three arbitrators:

(a) one arbitrator appointed by agreement of the disputing investors;

(b) one arbitrator appointed by the respondent; and

24

(c) the chairman of the arbitral tribunal appointed by the Secretary-
General of ICSID.

5. If, within the sixty (60) days after the Secretary-General receives a request
made under paragraph 2, the respondent fails or the disputing investors fail to
appoint an arbitrator in accordance with paragraph 4, the Secretary-General, on
request of any disputing party sought to be covered by the order, shall appoint
the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed.

6. Where a tribunal established under this Article is satisfied that two or more
claims that have been submitted to arbitration in accordance with Article 3.15
(Institution of Arbitral Proceedings), have a question of law or fact in common,
and arise out of the same events or circumstances, the tribunal may, in the interest
of fair and efficient resolution of the claims, and after hearing the disputing
parties, by order:

(a) assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine together, all or part
of the claims;

(b) assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine one or more claims,
whose determination it considers would assist in the resolution of
the other claims; or

(c) instruct a tribunal previously established under Article 3.16
(Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal) to assume jurisdiction over
and to hear and determine together, all or part of the claims,
provided that:

(i) that tribunal, at the request of any disputing investor, not
previously a disputing party before that tribunal, shall be
reconstituted with its original members, except that the arbitrator
for the disputing investors shall be appointed pursuant to
paragraphs 4(a) and 5; and

(11) that tribunal shall decide whether any previous hearing must be
repeated.

7. Where a tribunal has been established under this Article, a disputing
investor that has submitted a claim to arbitration pursuant to Article 3.15
(Institution of Arbitral Proceedings) and that has not been named in a request
made under paragraph 2, may make a written request to the tribunal that it be
included in any order issued under paragraph 6, specifying:

25

(a) the name and address of the disputing investor;
(b) the nature of the order sought; and
(c) the grounds on which the order is sought.
The claimant shall provide the Secretary-General with a copy of his request.

8. A tribunal established pursuant to this Article shall conduct the
proceedings in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, except as
modified by this Section.

9. A tribunal established under Article 3.16 (Constitution of the Arbitral
Tribunal) shall not have jurisdiction to decide a claim or a part of a claim over
which a tribunal established or instructed under this Article has assumed
jurisdiction.

10. On application of a disputing party, a tribunal established pursuant to this
Article may, pending its decision under paragraph 6, order that the proceedings
of a tribunal established under Article 3.16 (Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal)
be stayed, unless the latter tribunal has already adjourned its proceedings.

Section C: Final Provisions

Article 3.24
Denial of Benefits

A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of the other
Party and to its investments if the investor is an enterprise owned or controlled
by persons of a non-Party or the denying Party, and such enterprise has no
substantive business operations in the territory of the other Party.

Article 3.25
Publication of International Agreements

I. Each Party shall ensure that international agreements pertaining to or
affecting investors or investment activities to which a Party is a signatory shall
be promptly published or otherwise made available in such a manner as to enable
interested persons or Parties to become acquainted with them.

26

2. To the extent possible, each Party shall make the international agreements
of the kind referred to in paragraph I available on the Internet. Each Party shall,
upon request by the other Party, promptly respond to specific questions from and
provide information to the other Party with respect to the international
agreements referred to in paragraph 1,

Article 3.26
General Exceptions'®

Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner
which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination
against the other Party or its investors where like conditions prevail, or a
disguised restriction on investments of investors of the other Party in the
territory of a Party, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent the
adoption or enforcement by a Party of measures:

(a) necessary to protect public morals or to maintain public order!’,

(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;!®

(c) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement including
those relating to:

(1) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal
with the effects of a default on a contract;

(11) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the
processing and dissemination of personal data and the
protection of confidentiality of individual records and
accounts;

(iii) safety;

'6 For greater certainty, the application of the general exception to these provisions shall not be
interpreted so as to diminish the ability of governments to take measures where investors are not in like
circumstances due to the existence of legitimate regulatory objectives.

'’ The public order exception may be invoked only where a genuine and sufficiently serious threat is
posed to one of the fundamental interests of society.

'8 The Parties understand that the measures referred in subparagraph I(b) include environmental
measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health.

27

(d) relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such
measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on
domestic production or consumption.

Article 3.27
Savings Clause

1. For ten (10) years from the date of termination of this Agreement, the
following provisions (including the relevant Annexes) shall continue to apply to
covered investments in existence at the date of termination, and without
prejudice to the application thereafter of the rules of general international law:

(a) the provisions of this Chapter; and

(b)such other provisions in this Agreement as may be necessary for or
consequential to the application or interpretation of this Chapter.

2. For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph 1 shall not apply to the
establishment, acquisition or expansion of investments after the date of
termination.

CHAPTER 4
TRANSPARENCY

Article 4.1
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

“interested person” means any natural person or juridical person
that may be subject to any rights or obligations under a measure of
general application; and

“measure of general application” does not include:
(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or quasi-
judicial proceeding that applies to a particular person, good

or service in a specific case; or

(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or

practice.
Article 4.2
Publication
l. Each Party shall ensure that its measures of general application with

respect to any matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published
or otherwise made available in such a manner as to enable the other Party
and interested persons to become acquainted with them.

2. To the extent possible, each Party shall:

(a) publish in advance any such measures of general application
that it proposes to adopt; and

(b) provide interested persons and the other Party a reasonable
opportunity to comment on such measures.

Article 4.3
Notification and Provision of Information

1. To the maximum extent possible, each Party shall notify the other Party of
any measure which, the Pally considers, may materially affect the operation of
this Agreement or otherwise substantially affect the other Party's interests under
this Agreement.

2. Upon request of the other Party, a Party shall promptly provide
information and respond to questions pertaining to any measure, whether or not
the requesting Party has been previously notified of that measure.

3. Any notification or information provided under this Article shall be
without prejudice as to whether the measure is consistent with this Agreement.

4. Any notification, request or information under this Article shall be
provided to the other Party through the relevant contact points.

5. When the information pursuant to paragraph I has been made available by
notification to the WTO in accordance with its relevant rules and procedures or
when the mentioned information has been made available on the official,
publicly accessible and fee-free websites of the Parties, the information exchange
shall be considered to have taken place.

Article 4.4
Administrative Proceedings

1. With a view to administering in a consistent, impartial and reasonable
manner all measures of general application with respect to any matter covered
by this Agreement, each Party, in its administrative proceedings applying such
measures to particular persons, goods or services of the other Party in specific
cases, shall:

(a)endeavour to provide persons of the other Party that are directly
affected by a proceeding with reasonable notice, in accordance with
procedures, when a proceeding is initiated, including a description of
the nature of the proceeding, a statement of the legal authority under
which the proceeding is initiated, and a general description of any
issues in controversy;

(b)afford such persons a reasonable opportunity to present facts and
arguments in support of their positions prior to any final administrative
action, insofar as time, the nature of the proceeding, and the public
interest permit; and

(c)ensure that the procedures are in accordance with its laws and
regulations.

Article 4.5
Review of Administrative Actions

I. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial or
administrative tribunals or procedures for the purposes, inter alia, of the prompt
review and correction of administrative actions! relating to matters covered by
this Agreement. Such tribunals or procedures shall be impartial and independent
of the office or authority entrusted with administrative enforcement and shall not
have any substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, in any such tribunals or procedures, the
parties to the proceeding are provided with the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions;
and

(b)a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record or, where
required by its laws and regulations, the record compiled by the
administrative authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided for
in its laws and regulations, that such decision shall be implemented by, and shall
govern the practice of, the office or authority with respect to the administrative
action at issue.

Article 4.6
Specific Rules

Specific provisions in other Chapters of this Agreement regarding the
subject matter of this Chapter shall prevail to the extent that they differ from this
Chapter.

' For greater certainty, the review of administrative actions can take the form of common law judicial
review, and the correction of administrative actions may include a referral back to the body that took
such action for corrective action.

CHAPTER 5
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Article 5.1
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

“arbitrator” means a member of an arbitration panel established
under Article 5.8 (Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration Panel);

“arbitration panel” means a panel established under Article 5.8
(Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration Panel);

“complaining Party” means any Party that requests the establishment of
an arbitration panel under Article 5.7 (Initiation of Arbitration Procedure);

“DSU” means the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the
Settlement of Disputes contained in Annex 2 of the WTO Agreement;

“Party complained against” means the Party that is alleged to be in
violation of the provisions of this Agreement; and

“proceeding”, unless otherwise specified, means an arbitration panel
proceeding under this Chapter.

Article 5.2 Objective

The objective of this Chapter is to avoid and settle any dispute between
the Parties with a view to arriving at, where possible, a mutually acceptable
solution.

Article 5.3
Scope

l. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply
with respect to the avoidance or settlement of all disputes between the Parties
regarding the interpretation or application of the provisions of this Agreement
wherever a Party considers that:

(a) a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with the obligations
under this Agreement; or

(b) the other Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under
this Agreement.

2. For greater certainty, disputes arising from the nullification or impairment
of any benefit that a Party could reasonably have expected to accrue to it under
this Agreement as a result of the application of any measure by the other Party
which is not inconsistent with this Agreement shall not be subject to the
provisions of this Chapter.

Article 5.4
Choice of Forum

l. Recourse to the dispute settlement provisions of this Chapter shall be
without prejudice to any action in the WTO framework, including dispute
settlement proceedings.

2. Where the complaining Party has, with regard to a particular measure,
initiated a dispute settlement proceeding either under this Chapter or under the
WTO Agreement, it shall not institute a dispute settlement proceeding regarding
the same measure in the other forum until the first proceeding has ended.
Moreover, the complaining Party should not initiate dispute settlement
proceedings under this Chapter and under the WTO Agreement, unless
substantially different obligations are in dispute, or unless the forum selected
fails for procedural or jurisdictional reasons to make findings on the claim
seeking redress of that obligation, provided that the failure of the forum is not
the result of a failure of a Party to act diligently.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 2:

(a) dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement are
deemed to be initiated by a Party's request for the establishment of a
panel under Article 6 of the DSU and are deemed to be ended when
the Dispute Settlement Body (hereinafter referred to as "DSB")
established in paragraph I of Article 2 of the DSU adopts the Panel’
s report, and the Appellate Body's report as the case may be, under
Articles 16 and paragraph 5 of Article 1 7 of the DSU; and

(b) dispute settlement proceedings under this Chapter are deemed to be
initiated by a Party's request for the establishment of an arbitration
panel under Article 5.7 (Initiation of Arbitration Procedure) and are
deemed to be ended when the arbitration panel issues its final report
to the Parties under Article 5.11 (Interim and Final Arbitration Panel

Report) or when arbitration procedures have been terminated under
Article 5.15 (Suspension and Termination of Arbitration Procedures).

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude a Party from implementing the
suspension of obligations authorised by the DSB. The WTO Agreement shall not
be invoked to preclude a Party from suspending obligations as provided for under
this Chapter.

Article 5.5
Consultations

1. The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation and
application of the provisions of this Agreement and to resolve any dispute thereof
by entering into consultations in good faith with the aim of reaching a mutually
agreed solution.

2. A Party shall seek consultations, by means of a written request to the other
Party's contact point, and shall give the reasons for the request, including
identification of the measures at issue, the applicable provisions of the
Agreement and the reasons for the applicability of such provisions.

3. Consultations shall be held no later than thirty (30) days after the date of
receipt of the request, and shall be deemed concluded sixty (60) days after the
date of receipt of the request, unless the Parties agree otherwise. Consultations
on matters of urgency, including those regarding perishable goods, shall be held
no later than fifteen (15) days after the date of receipt of the request, and shall be
deemed concluded thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of the request, unless
the Parties agree otherwise.

4. Consultations may be held in person or by any technological means
available to the Parties. If consultations are held in person, they shall be held in
the territory of the Party to whom the request was made, unless the Parties agree
otherwise. Consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights
of either Party in any further proceedings.

5. If the Party to whom the request is made does not respond to the request
for consultations within ten (10) days of the date of its receipt, or 1f consultations
are not held within the timeframes laid down in paragraph 3, or if consultations
have been concluded and no mutually agreed solution has been reached, the
complaining Party may request the establishment of an arbitration panel in
accordance with Article 5.7 (Initiation of Arbitration Procedure).

Article 5.6
Good Offices, Conciliation or Mediation

1. The Parties may at any time agree to good offices, conciliation or
mediation. Procedures for good offices, conciliation or mediation may begin at
any time. They may be terminated at any time upon the request of either the
complaining Party or the Party complained against.

2. If the Parties so agree, good offices, conciliation or mediation may
continue while the proceedings of the arbitration panel provided for in this
Chapter are in progress.

3. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation and mediation, and in
particular positions taken by the Parties during those proceedings, shall be
confidential and without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any other
proceeding.

Article 5.7
Initiation of Arbitration Procedure

A request for the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be made in
writing to the contact point of the Party complained against. The complaining
Party shall identify in its request the specific measure or other matter at issue,
whether consultations have been held and a summary of the legal basis of the
complaint in a manner sufficient to present the problem clearly.

Article 5.8
Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration Panel

1. An arbitration panel shall be composed of three arbitrators. Each Party
shall appoint an arbitrator no later than thirty (30) days after the receipt of the
request referred to in Article 5.7 (Initiation of Arbitration Procedure), and the
two arbitrators shall, no later than thirty (30) days after the appointment of the
second of them, designate by agreement the third arbitrator.

2. The Parties shall, no later than seven (7) days after the designation of the
third arbitrator, approve or disapprove the appointment of that arbitrator, who
shall, if approved, act as the chairperson of the arbitration panel.

3. If the third arbitrator has not been designated as provided under paragraph
1, or either Party disapproves the appointment of the third arbitrator, the Director-
General of the WTO shall, at the request of either Party, within a further period

of thirty (30) days, appoint the third arbitrator, who shall act as the chairperson
of the arbitration panel.

4. If a Party does not appoint an arbitrator as provided under paragraph 1, the
other Party may inform the Director-General of the WTO, who shall appoint the
chairperson of the arbitration panel within a further period of thirty (30) days.
Upon appointment, the chairperson shall request the Party which has not
appointed an arbitrator to do so within fourteen (14) days. If after such period,
that Party has still not appointed an arbitrator, the chairperson shall inform the
Director-General of the WTO, who shall make this appointment within a further
period of thirty (30) days.

5. For the purposes of paragraphs 3 and 4, in the event that the Director-
General of the WTO 1s a national of Armenia or Singapore, the Deputy Director-
General of the WTO or the officer next in seniority who is not such a national
shall be requested to make the necessary appointments.

6. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on
which the last of the three arbitrators is appointed.

7. Any person appointed as an arbitrator of the arbitration panel shall have
expertise or experience in law, international trade, other matters covered by this
Agreement, or the resolution of disputes arising under international trade
agreements. An arbitrator shall be chosen strictly on the bases of objectivity,
reliability, sound judgment and independence, and shall conduct himself or
herself on these bases throughout the course of the arbitration proceedings and
in accordance with Annex 5—2 (Code of Conduct for Arbitrators). Additionally,
the chairperson shall not be a national of, have his or her usual place of residence
in the territory of, or be employed by Armenia or Singapore. The chairperson
shall be a national of a state having diplomatic relations with Armenia and
Singapore. If a Party considers that any arbitrator of the arbitration panel is in
violation of these requirements, the Parties shall consult and if they agree, the
arbitrator shall be removed and a new arbitrator shall be appointed in accordance
with this Article.

8. If any arbitrator of the arbitration panel appointed under this Article
resigns or becomes unable to participate in the proceeding, or is removed
according to paragraph 8, a successor shall be appointed in the same manner as
prescribed for the appointment of the original arbitrator. In such a case, the work
of the arbitration panel shall be suspended for a period beginning on the date the
original arbitrator resigns, becomes unable to participate in the proceeding, or is
removed according to paragraph 8, and all time frames applicable to the
arbitration panel proceedings shall be extended by the amount of time for which

the work of the arbitration panel is suspended. The work of the arbitration panel
shall resume on the date the successor is appointed. The successor shall have all
the powers and duties of the original arbitrator.

Article 5.9
Terms of Reference

Unless the Parties otherwise agree no later than twenty (20) days after the
date of receipt of the request for the establishment of the arbitration panel, the
terms of reference of the arbitration panel shall be:

"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of the Agreement
on Trade in Services and Investment between the Republic of
Armenia and the Republic of Singapore, the matter referred to in the
request for the establishment of an arbitration panel pursuant to
Article 5.7 (Initiation of Arbitration Procedure), and to make
findings, determinations and any recommendations for resolution of
the dispute, and issue a written report, as provided in Article 5.11
(Interim and Final Arbitration Panel Report)".

Article 5.10
Proceedings of the Arbitration Panel
l. The arbitration panel shall meet in closed session, unless the Parties decide
otherwise.

2. Each Party shall be given the opportunity to provide at least one written
submission and to attend any of the presentations, statements or rebuttals in the
proceedings. All information or written submissions submitted by a Party to the
arbitration panel, including any comments on the interim report and responses to
questions put by the arbitration panel, shall be made available to the other Party.

3. A Party asserting that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with this
Agreement shall have the burden of establishing such inconsistency. A Party
asserting that a measure is subject to an exception under this Agreement shall
have the burden of establishing that the exception applies.

4. The arbitration panel should consult with the Parties as appropriate and
provide adequate opportunities for the development of a mutually satisfactory
resolution or mutually agreed solution.

5. The arbitration panel shall make every effort to take any decision by
consensus. Where a decision cannot be arrived at by consensus, the matter at
issue shall be decided by majority vote.

6. At the request of a Party, or upon its own initiative, the arbitration panel
may obtain information from any source it deems appropriate for the arbitration
panel proceedings. The arbitration panel also has the right to seek the opinion of
experts as it deems appropriate. The arbitration panel shall consult the Parties
before choosing such experts. Any information obtained in this manner must be
disclosed to the Parties and submitted for their comments. Where the arbitration
panel takes such information into account in the preparation of its report, it shall
also take into account any comment by the Parties on such information.

7. The deliberations of the arbitration panel and the documents submitted to
it shall be kept confidential.

8. Notwithstanding paragraph 7, either Party may make public statements as
to its views regarding the dispute, but shall treat as confidential any information
and written submissions submitted by the other Party to the arbitration panel
which that Party has designated as confidential. Where a Party has provided
information or written submissions designated as confidential, that Party shall,
no later than thirty (30) days after a request by the other Party, provide a non-
confidential summary of the information or written submissions which may be
disclosed publicly.

Article 5.11
Interim and Final Arbitration Panel Report

1. The arbitration panel shall issue an interim report to the Parties setting out:
(a) a summary of the submissions and arguments of the Parties;
(b) the findings of fact, together with reasons;
(c)its determination as to the interpretation or application of the
provisions of this Agreement, and whether

(1) a measure at issue is inconsistent with the obligations of this
Agreement; or

(11) a Party complained against has otherwise failed to carry out its
obligations under this Agreement;

(d) any other determination requested in the terms of reference; and

(e) if there is a determination of inconsistency, its recommendation that
the Party complained against bring the measure into conformity with
the obligations under this Agreement and, if the Parties agree, on the
means to resolve the dispute,

no later than ninety (90) days, or sixty (60) days in case of urgency, after the date
of establishment of the arbitration panel. Where it considers that this deadline
cannot be met, the chairperson of the arbitration panel must notify the Parties in
writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the arbitration
panel plans to issue its interim report. Under no circumstances should the
arbitration panel issue its interim report later than one hundred and twenty (120)
days after the date of its establishment.

2. Any Party may submit a written request for the arbitration panel to review
precise aspects of the interim report within thirty (30) days of its issuance. The
arbitration panel shall consider any written comments on the interim report by
the Parties within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the written
comments. After considering any such written comments by the Parties, the
arbitration panel may modify its report and make any further examination it
considers appropriate.

3. The arbitration panel shall issue its final report to the Parties no later than
forty-five (45) days, or thirty (30) days in case of urgency, after the issuance of
the interim report. Where it considers that this deadline cannot be met, the
chairperson of the arbitration panel shall notify the Parties in writing, stating the
reasons for the delay and the date on which the arbitration panel plans to issue
its final report. Under no circumstances should the arbitration panel issue its final
report later than one hundred and eighty (180) days after the date of its
establishment. The final report shall set out the matters listed in paragraph 1,
include a sufficient discussion of the arguments made at the interim review stage
and address clearly the written comments of the Parties.

4. The final report of the arbitration panel shall be unconditionally accepted
by the Parties with regard to a particular dispute. In its findings and
recommendations, the arbitration panel cannot add to or diminish the rights and
obligations provided in this Agreement.

Article 5.12
Implementation of the Arbitration Panel Report

l. Each Party shall take any measure necessary to comply in good faith with
the final report of the arbitration panel. If, in its final report, the arbitration panel
determines that a measure at issue is inconsistent with the obligations under this
Agreement, or that the Party complained against has otherwise failed to carry out
its obligations under this Agreement, the Party complained against shall,
whenever possible, eliminate the non-conformity with this Agreement.

2. No later than thirty (30) days after the issuance of the final report of the
arbitration panel, the Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party
of the time it will require for compliance with the final report (hereinafter
referred to as the "reasonable period of time"), if immediate compliance is not
practicable. The Parties shall endeavour to agree on the reasonable period of time.

3. If the Parties fail to agree within a period of forty-five (45) days after the
issuance of the final report of the arbitration panel on the reasonable period of
time, the complaining Party may, no later than fifty (50) days after the issuance
of the final report, request in writing to the original arbitration panel to determine
the length of the reasonable period of time. Such request shall be notified
simultaneously to the other Party. The original arbitration panel shall issue to the
Parties its determination on the length of the reasonable period of time no later
than twenty (20) days after the date of the submission of the request.

4. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer
available, the procedures set out in Article 5.8 (Composition and Establishment
of the Arbitration Panel) shall apply. The time limit for issuing the determination
on the length of the reasonable period of time shall be no later than thirty-five
(35) days! after the date of the submission of the request referred to in paragraph
3,

5. The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party before
the end of the reasonable period of time of any measure that it has taken to
comply with the final report of the arbitration panel. The reasonable period of
time may be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties at any time before its

expiry.

6. In the event that there is disagreement between the Parties concerning the
existence or the consistency of any measure notified under paragraph 5 with the
provisions of this Agreement, the complaining Party may request in writing that

' For greater certainty, the period of thirty-five (35) days does not include any days suspended pursuant
to paragraph 9 of Article 5.8 (Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration Panel).

the original arbitration panel make a determination on the matter. Such request
shall be notified simultaneously to the other Party, and shall identify any specific
measure at issue and the provisions of this Agreement that it considers the
measure to be inconsistent with, in a manner sufficient to present the
disagreement clearly. The original arbitration panel shall issue to the Parties its
determination no later than forty-five (45) days after the date of the submission
of the request.

7. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer
available, the procedures set out in Article 5.8 (Composition and Establishment
of the Arbitration Panel) shall apply. The time limit for issuing the determination
shall be no later than sixty (60) days’ after the date of the submission of the
request referred to in paragraph 6.

Article 5.13
Compensation and Suspension of Concessions or Other Obligations

l. If the Party complained against fails to notify any measure taken to
comply with the final report of the arbitration panel in accordance with Article
5.12 (Implementation of the Arbitration Panel Report), or if the arbitration panel
determines that any measure notified under Article 5.12 (Implementation of the
Arbitration Panel Report) does not exist or is inconsistent with any provision of
this Agreement, the Party complained against shall enter into negotiations with
the complaining Party, with a view to reaching a mutually acceptable agreement
on compensation.

2. If the Parties fail to agree on compensation within thirty (30) days after:

(a) the expiry of the reasonable period of time; or

(b) the issuance of the arbitration panel's determination that any measure
notified under Article 5.12 (Implementation of the Arbitration Panel
Report) does not exist or is inconsistent with any provision of this
Agreement,

as the case may be, the complaining Party shall be entitled, upon notification to
the Party complained against, to suspend concessions or other obligations arising
from this Agreement of equivalent effect to those affected by the measure that
the arbitration panel has found to be inconsistent with this Agreement. The
notification shall specify the level of concessions or other obligations that the

* For greater certainty, the period of sixty (60) days does not include any days suspended pursuant to
paragraph 9 of Article 5.8 (Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration Panel).

complaining Party intends to suspend and indicate the reasons on which the
suspension is based. The complaining Party may begin implementing the
suspension twenty (20) days after the delivery of its notification to the Party
complained against, subject to paragraph 4.

3. In considering what concessions or other obligations to suspend pursuant
to paragraph 2:

(a) the complaining Party should first seek to suspend concessions or
other obligations with respect to the same sector as that in which the
final report of the arbitration panel referred to in Article 5.11 (Interim
and Final Arbitration Panel Report) has found an inconsistency with
the obligations under this Agreement;

(b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not practicable or
effective to suspend concessions or other obligations with respect to
the same sector, 1t may suspend concessions or other obligations
with respect to other sectors; and

(c) the complaining Party will take into consideration those concessions
or other obligations the suspension of which would least disturb the
functioning of this Agreement.

4. The Party complained against may request in writing the original
arbitration panel to make a determination on whether the level of concessions or
other obligations that the complaining Party intends to suspend is equivalent to
those affected by the measure that the arbitration panel has found to be
inconsistent with this Agreement. Such request shall be notified to the
complaining Party before the expiry of the twenty (20)-day period referred to in
paragraph 2. The original arbitration panel, having sought, if appropriate, the
opinion of experts, shall issue to the Parties its determination no later than thirty
(30) days after the date of the submission of the request. Concessions or other
obligations shall not be suspended until the arbitration panel has issued its
determination and any suspension shall be consistent with the arbitration panel's
determination.

5. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer
available, the procedures laid down in Article 5.8 (Composition and
Establishment of the Arbitration Panel) shall apply. The time limit for issuing the

determination shall be no later than forty-five (45) days? after the date of the
submission of the request referred to in paragraph 4.

6. | The compensation referred to in paragraph I and the suspension referred
to in paragraph 2 are temporary measures. Neither compensation nor suspension
is preferred to full elimination of any non-conformity with this Agreement as
determined in the final report of the arbitration panel. Any suspension shall only
be applied until such time as the non-conformity is fully eliminated, or the non-
conformity 1s determined in accordance with Article 5.14 (Compliance Review)
to have been eliminated, or the Parties have otherwise reached a mutually
satisfactory solution.

Article 5.14
Compliance Review

l. If the Party complained against considers that it has eliminated the non-
conformity with this Agreement as originally determined by the final report of
the arbitration panel, it may request in writing that the original arbitration panel
make a determination on the matter. Such request shall be notified
simultaneously to the other Party. The original arbitration panel shall issue to the
Parties its determination no later than forty-five (45) days after the date of the
submission of the request. If the arbitration panel determines that the Party
complained against has eliminated the non-conformity with the provisions of this
Agreement, the complaining Party shall cease to apply any suspension of
concessions or other obligations that it has implemented.

2. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer
available, the procedures set out in Article 5.8 (Composition and Establishment
of the Arbitration Panel) shall apply. The time limit for issuing the determination
shall be no later than sixty (60) days* after the date of the submission of the
request referred to in paragraph I.

Article 5.15
Suspension and Termination of Arbitration Procedures

1. The arbitration panel shall, at the written request of both Parties, suspend
its work at any time for a period agreed by the Parties, not exceeding twelve (1
2) months, and shall resume its work at the end of this agreed period at the written
request of the complaining Party, or before the end of this agreed period at the
written request of both Parties. If the complaining Party does not request the

> For greater certainty, the period of forty-five (45) days does not include any days suspended pursuant
to paragraph 9 of Article 5.8 (Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration Panel).

“For greater certainty, the period of sixty (60) days does not include any days suspended pursuant to
paragraph 9 of Article 5.8 (Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration Panel).

resumption of the arbitration panel's work before the expiry of the agreed
suspension period, the dispute settlement procedures initiated pursuant to this
Chapter shall be deemed terminated. Subject to Article 5.4 (Choice of Forum),
the suspension or termination of the arbitration panel's work is without prejudice
to the rights of either Party in another proceeding.

2. The Parties may, at any time, agree in writing to terminate the dispute
settlement procedures initiated pursuant to this Chapter.

Article 5.16
Rules of Procedure

Dispute settlement procedures under this Chapter shall be governed by
Annex 5 — | (Rules of Procedure for Arbitration).

Article 5.17
Rules of Interpretation

The arbitration panel shall interpret the provisions of this Agreement in
accordance with customary rules of interpretation of public international law.

Article 5.18
Expenses

Each Party shall bear the cost of its appointed arbitrator and its own
expenses and legal costs. The cost of the chairperson of an arbitration panel and
other expenses associated with the conduct of the proceedings shall be borne by
the Parties in equal shares.

Article 5.19
Time Limits

1. All time limits laid down in this Chapter shall be counted in calendar days,
the first day being the day following the act or fact to which they refer, unless
otherwise specified.

2. Any time limit referred to in this Chapter may be modified by mutual
agreement of the Parties.

CHAPTER 6
INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 6.1
Joint Committee

1. The Parties hereby establish a Joint Committee comprising representatives
of Singapore and of Armenia.

2. After the entry into force of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall
meet every two years in Singapore or in Armenia, unless the Parties agree
otherwise. The Joint Committee shall be co-chaired by Ministerial-level officials
from each Party, or their designated representatives. The Joint Committee shall
set its own agenda.

3. The Joint Committee shall:

(a) review the general functioning of this Agreement;

(b) supervise and facilitate the application of this Agreement, and further its
general aims;

(c) supervise the work of all sub-committees, working groups and other
bodies established under this Agreement;

(d) consider ways to further enhance trade relations between the Parties;
(e) seek to resolve any issues in connection with this Agreement; and

(f) consider any other matter related to this Agreement as the Parties may
mutually agree.

4. The Joint Committee may:

(a) decide to establish or dissolve any sub-committee or working group,
or allocate responsibilities or functions to it;

(b) decide to communicate with all interested persons and experts where
relevant to any matter falling within its responsibilities;

(c) review recommendations made by sub-committees and working groups;

(d) make recommendations to the Parties that it deems appropriate, including
on any modification to this Agreement;

(e) adopt decisions or make recommendations as envisaged by this
Agreement;

(f) adopt its own rules of procedure; and

(g) take any other action in the exercise of its functions as the Parties
may agree.

5. The Joint Committee shall draw up its decisions and recommendations by
consensus between the Parties, The Parties shall take the necessary measures to
operationalise the decisions of the Joint Committee.

Article 6.2
Sub-Committees and Working Groups

Sub-committees or working groups may be set up pursuant to this
Agreement or by the Joint Committee acting consistently with this Agreement.
They shall report to the Joint Committee on their activities at each regular
meeting of the Joint Committee. The creation or existence of a sub-committee or
working group shall not prevent either Party from bringing any matter directly
to the Joint Committee.

Article 6.3
Contact Points

Each Party shall designate a contact point, which shall be responsible
generally for communications with the other Party and the Joint Committee, for
any matters covered by this Agreement except as otherwise specifically set out
in other provisions of this Agreement. Each Party shall designate its contact point
in accordance with its internal procedures and notify the other Party on such
designation within ninety (90) days from the date of entry into force of the
Agreement. In the event of any change to a Party's contact point, that Party shall
duly notify the other Party.

Article 6.4
Relationship with Other Agreements

1. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other
under the WTO Agreement and the other agreements negotiated thereunder to which
they are party, and any other international agreement to which they are party.

2. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and other agreements
to which both Parties are party, the relevant Parties shall immediately consult each
other with a view to finding a mutually satisfactory solution, taking into consideration
general principles of international law,

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, if this Agreement explicitly contains provisions
dealing with such inconsistency as indicated in paragraph 2, those provisions shall
apply.

Article 6.5
Evolving WTO Law

If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated
into this Agreement is amended, the Parties shall consult with each other, via the
Joint Committee, with a view to finding a mutually satisfactory solution, where
necessary.

Article 6.6
Taxation

1. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to
taxation measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of either
Party under any tax agreement to which both Parties are parties. In the event of
any inconsistency between this Agreement and any such agreement, that
agreement shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. In the case of a bilateral
tax agreement between the Parties, the competent authorities under that
agreement shall have sole responsibility for determining whether any
inconsistency exists between this Agreement and that agreement.

3. Article 3.11 (Expropriation) and Section B (Investor-State Dispute
Settlement) of Chapter 3 (Investment) shall apply to taxation measures to the
extent that such taxation measures constitute expropriation as provided for
therein.! An investor that seeks to invoke Article 3.11 (Expropriation) with

' With reference to Article 3.11 (Expropriation), in assessing whether a taxation measure constitutes
expropriation, the following considerations are relevant:
(a) the imposition of taxes does not generally constitute expropriation. The mere
introduction of new taxation measures or the imposition of taxes in more than one jurisdiction
in respect of an investment, does not in and of itself constitute expropriation;
(b) taxation measures which are consistent with internationally recognised tax policies,
principles and practices do not constitute expropriation. In particular, taxation measures aimed

respect to a taxation measure must first refer to the competent authorities
described in paragraph 5, at the time that it gives notice under Article 3.15
(Institution of Arbitral Proceedings), the issue of whether that taxation measure
involves an expropriation. If the competent authorities do not agree to consider
the issue or, having agreed to consider it, fail to agree that the measure is not an
expropriation within a period of six months of such referral, the investor may
submit its claim to arbitration under Article 3.15 (institution of Arbitral
Proceedings). For greater certainty, if the competent authorities agree, pursuant
to this paragraph, that the measure is not an expropriation, the investor shall not
invoke Article 3.11 (Expropriation) as a basis for a claim.

4. For the purposes of this Article:
(a) “competent authorities” means:

(1) for Singapore, the Minister for Finance or his authorised
representative; and

(i) for Armenia, the Ministry of Finance or its authorised
representative;

(b) “tax agreement” means an agreement for the avoidance of double
taxation or other international taxation agreement or arrangement.

Article 6.7
Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments

I. Where a Party is in serious balance-of-payments and external financial
difficulties, or under threat thereof, it may adopt or maintain restrictive measures
with regard to cross-border trade in services and investments, and on payments
and transfers related to cross-border trade in services and investments. Such
restrictive measures shall be consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the IMF.

2. Any Party maintaining or having adopted restrictive measures, or any
changes thereto, shall promptly notify the other Party of them.

at preventing the avoidance or evasion of taxes should not, generally, be considered to be
expropriatory; and

(c) taxation measures which are applied on a non-discriminatory basis, as opposed to being
targeted at investors of a particular nationality or specific individual taxpayers, are less likely to
constitute expropriation, A taxation measure should not constitute expropriation if, when the
investment is made, it was already in force, and information about the measure was made public
or otherwise made publicly available.

3. Where the restrictive measures referred to in paragraph 1 are adopted or
maintained, consultations shall be held promptly by the Joint Committee, Such
consultations shall assess the balance-of-payments situation of the Party
concerned and the restrictive measures adopted or maintained under this Article,
taking into account factors such as:

(a) the nature and extent of the balance-of-payments and external
financial difficulties;

(b) — the external economic and trading environment; or
(c) alternative corrective measures which may be available.

The consultations shall address the compliance of any restrictive measures with
paragraphs 1 and 2. All findings of statistical and other facts presented by the
IMF relating to foreign exchange, monetary reserves and balance-of-payments
shall be accepted, and conclusions shall be based on the assessment by the IMF
of the balance-of-payments and external financial situation of the Party
concerned.

Article 6.8
Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a) to require a Party to furnish any information, the disclosure of which
it determines to be contrary to its essential security interests; or

(b) to preclude a Party from applying measures that it considers
necessary for the fulfilment of its obligations with respect to the
maintenance or restoration of international peace or security, or for the
protection of its own essential security interests.”

Article 6.9
Disclosure of Information

’ For greater certainty, nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any action which it
considers necessary for the protection of critical public infrastructure, such as the communications,
power, water and transportation infrastructure, including but not limited to imposing restrictions on
operators of such infrastructure and preventing deliberate attempts intended to disable or degrade such
infrastructure.

I. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to make
available confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law
enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or which would
prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or
private.

2. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, where a Party provides
information to the other Party (or to the Joint Committee, sub-committees,
working groups or any other bodies) in accordance with this Agreement and
designates the information as confidential, the Party (or the Joint Committee, sub-
committees, working groups or any other bodies) receiving the information shall
maintain the confidentiality of the information, use it only for the purposes
specified by the Party providing the information, and shall not disclose it without
specific written permission of the Party providing the information.

Article 6.10
Amendments

The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. Such amendment
shall enter into force in the manner set out in Article 6.12 (Entry into Force).

Article 6.11
Joint Interpretations

The Parties may jointly adopt in writing interpretations of the provisions of this
Agreement, which shall be binding on the Parties and all bodies and arbitration panels
established under this Agreement.

Article 6.12
Entry into Force

The Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month
following the date on which the Parties exchange written notifications certifying that
they have completed their respective internal legal procedures necessary for the entry
into force of this Agreement. The Parties may by agreement fix another date.

Article 6.13
Duration

1. | This Agreement shall be valid indefinitely.

2. Either Party may notify in writing the other Party of its intention to terminate
this Agreement.
3. This Agreement shall be terminated six (6) months after the notification under

paragraph 2. This is without prejudice to specific provisions in this Agreement
which qualify the effect of the termination, namely, Article 3.27 (Savings Clause).

4. Within thirty (30) days of delivery of a notification under paragraph 2, either
Party may request consultations regarding whether the termination of any
provision of this Agreement should take effect at a later date than provided under
paragraph 2. Such consultations shall commence within thirty (30) days of a
Party's delivery of such request.

Article 6.14
Annexes

The Annexes to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof.