    CHAPTER 1 INITIAL PROVISIONS


ARTICLE 1
Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties to this Agreement, consistent with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and Article V of the GATS, hereby establish a free trade area.


ARTICLE 2
Objectives

The objectives of this Agreement are:

(a) to liberalise and promote trade in goods in accordance with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994;

(b) to liberalise and promote trade in services in accordance  with Article V of the GATS, including promotion of mutual recognition of professions;

(c) to establish a transparent, predictable and facilitative investment regime and provide a more stable policy framework for investors;

(d) to promote economic cooperation, explore new areas of collaboration, and further strengthen bilateral cooperation in view of recent regional and international strategic developments;

(e) to promote mutually beneficial economic relations as well as to encourage greater collaboration among their respective professional bodies and academic institutions;

(f) to enhance bilateral linkages through other sector-specific collaborations, including sanitary and phytosanitary measures, technical barriers to trade, and customs co-operation; and

(g) to improve the efficiency and competitiveness of their manufacturing and services sectors and to expand trade and investment between the Parties, including joint exploitation of commercial and economic opportunities in non-Parties.

      CHAPTER 2 GENERAL DEFINITIONS


ARTICLE 3
General Definitions

1. Unless otherwise provided, for the purposes of this Agreement:

(a) ASEAN means the Association of Southeast Asian Nations;

(a)bis 2023 Protocol means the Protocol to Further Upgrade the Free  Trade Agreement between the Government of the People’s  Republic of China and the Government of the Republic of  Singapore.

(b) customs duty refers to any duty or charge of any kind imposed in connection with the importation of a good but does not include:

(i) charges equivalent to an internal tax including excise duties and a goods and services tax imposed consistently with a Party's WTO obligations;

(ii) fees or other charges that:

(A) are limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered; and

(B) do not represent direct or indirect protection for domestic goods or a taxation of imports for fiscal purposes; and

(iii) other duties and charges pursuant to Article III:2 of  the GATT 1994, levied at the time of importation imposed consistently with Article 5 (National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation);

(c) days means calendar days, including weekends and holidays;

(d) GATS means the General Agreement on Trade in Services, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

(e) GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

(f) goods and products shall be understood to have the same meaning unless the context otherwise requires;

(g) originating goods of the other Party refers to goods of the other Party that are treated as originating  goods in accordance with Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin);


(h) other duties and charges refers to those provided for in sub- paragraph (b) of paragraph 1 of Article II of the GATT 1994;

(i) WTO means the World Trade Organisation; and

(j) WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organisation, done on 15 April 1994.

2. In this Agreement, all words in the singular shall include the plural and all words in the plural shall include the singular, unless otherwise indicated in the context.

CHAPTER 3 TRADE IN GOODS


ARTICLE 4
Scope and Coverage

This Chapter applies to trade in goods between the Parties, unless otherwise provided.


ARTICLE 5
National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation

Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994. To this end, the provisions of Article III of the GATT 1994 shall, mutatis mutandis, be incorporated into and form an integral part of this Agreement.


ARTICLE 6
Customs Duties

1. The tariff lines that are subject to the tariff reduction or elimination programme under this Agreement are all the tariff lines covered under  the Normal Track, as specified in Article 3(2)(a) of the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Co-operation between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the People's Republic of China done on 29 November 2004 (the "ASEAN-China Trade in Goods Agreement"), read with Annex 1 thereof. In the case of Singapore, this Agreement shall also include all tariff lines covered under the Sensitive Track, as specified in Article 3(2)(b) of the ASEAN-China Trade in Good Agreement, read
with Annex 2 thereof1.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, and subject to paragraph 1 as well as a Party's Tariff Elimination Schedule as set out in Annex 1 (Tariff Elimination Schedules), on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall eliminate its customs duties on originating goods of the other Party.

3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, either Party shall not increase any existing duty or introduce a new customs duty on an originating good of the other Party.



1 For greater certainty, in the case of China, tariff lines covered under the Sensitive Track, as specified in Article 3(2)(b) of the ASEAN-China Trade in Goods Agreement, read with Annex 2 thereof, shall continue to be governed by that Agreement.



ARTICLE 7
Accelerated Tariff Elimination

1. At the request of either Party, the Parties shall consult to consider accelerating the elimination of customs duties on originating goods as set out in their Tariff Elimination Schedules in Annex 1 (Tariff Elimination Schedules).

2. An agreement by the Parties to accelerate the elimination of customs duties on originating goods shall supersede any duty rate determined pursuant to their Schedules for such goods, and shall enter into force following approval by each Party in accordance with their applicable legal procedures.

3. A Party may at any time accelerate unilaterally the elimination of customs duties on originating goods of the other Party set out in its Tariff Elimination Schedule. A Party considering doing so shall inform the other Party as early as practicable before the new rate of customs duty takes effect.


ARTICLE 8
Quantitative Restrictions and Non-Tariff Measures

1. Each Party undertakes not to maintain any quantitative restrictions at any time unless otherwise permitted under the WTO disciplines.

2. Neither Party shall adopt or maintain any non-tariff measure on the importation of any good of the other Party or on the exportation of any good destined for the territory of the other Party, except in accordance with its WTO rights and obligations, or in accordance with other provisions of this Agreement.

3. Each Party shall ensure the transparency of its non-tariff measures permitted under paragraph 1 above and that they are not prepared, adopted or applied with a view to or with the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.


ARTICLE 9
State Trading Enterprises

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from maintaining or establishing a state trading enterprise in accordance with Article XVII of the GATT 1994.

CHAPTER 4  
RULES OF ORIGIN  
ARTICLE 1  
Definitions  
For the purposes of this Chapter:  
(a) aquaculture refers to the farming of aquatic organisms including fish,  molluscs, crustaceans, other aquatic invertebrates and aquatic plants,  from seedstock such as eggs, fry, fingerlings and larvae, by intervention  in the rearing or growth processes to enhance production, such as  regular stocking, feeding, protection from predators, etc;  
(b) fungible products and materials refers to goods or materials which are  interchangeable for commercial purposes, whose properties are  essentially identical, and between which it is impractical to differentiate  by a mere visual examination;  
(c) generally accepted accounting principles refers to the recognised  accounting standards of a Party with respect to the recording of  revenues, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities, the disclosure of  information and the preparation of financial statements. Those  standards may encompass broad guidelines of general application as  well as detailed standards, practices and procedures;  
(d) material refers to ingredients, parts, components, subassembly and/or  goods that were physically incorporated into another good or were  subject to a process in the production of another good;  
(e) non-originating material refers to a material that has not satisfied the  requirements of this Chapter;  
(f) originating materials or originating goods refers to materials or goods  which qualify as originating in accordance with this Chapter;  
(g) producer refers to a person who engages in the production of a good; 
(h) Product Specific Rules are rules that specify that the materials have  undergone a change in tariff classification, or undergone a specific  manufacturing or processing operation, or satisfy an ad valorem criterion, or a combination of any of these criteria;  
(i) production refers to methods of obtaining goods including growing,  mining, harvesting, raising, breeding, extracting, gathering, collecting, 
7  
capturing, fishing, trapping, hunting, manufacturing, producing,  processing or assembling a good; and  
(j) used means spent or consumed in the production of products. 
ARTICLE 2  
Origin Criteria  
For the purposes of this Agreement, products imported by a Party shall be deemed to  be originating and eligible for preferential concessions if they conform to the origin  requirements under any one of the following:  
  
(a) products which are wholly obtained or produced as set out and defined  in Article 3 (Wholly Obtained Products);  
  
(b) products which are produced entirely in one or both Parties, exclusively  from originating materials; or  
(c) products which are produced from non-originating materials, provided  that said products are eligible under Article 4 (Regional Value Content),  or Article 6 (Product Specific Rules);  
and satisfy all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.  
ARTICLE 3  
Wholly Obtained Products 
For the purposes of this Agreement, the following shall be considered as being wholly  produced or obtained in a Party:  
(a) plant1 and plant products harvested, picked or gathered there;  (b) live animals2 born and raised there;  
(c) products3 obtained from live animals referred to in sub-paragraph (b)  above;  
(d) products obtained from hunting, trapping, fishing, aquaculture, gathering  or capturing conducted there;  
  
1 Plant referred to in sub-paragraph (a) covers all plant life, including fruit, flowers, vegetables, trees,  seaweed, fungi and live plants.  
2 Animals referred to in sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) covers all animal life, including mammals, birds,  fish, crustaceans, molluscs, reptiles, bacteria and viruses.  
3 Products referred to in sub-paragraph (c) covers those obtained from live animals without further  processing, including milk, eggs, natural honey, hair, wool, semen and dung. 
8  
(e) minerals and other naturally occurring substances, not included in sub paragraphs (a) to (d), extracted or taken from its soil, waters, seabed or  beneath their seabed;  
(f) products taken from the waters, seabed or beneath the seabed outside  the territorial waters of that Party, provided that that Party has the rights  to exploit such waters, seabed and beneath the seabed in accordance  with international law;  
(g) products of sea fishing and other marine products taken from the high  seas by vessels registered with a Party or entitled to fly the flag of that  Party;  
(h) products processed and/or made on board factory ships registered with  a Party or entitled to fly the flag of that Party, exclusively from products  referred to in sub-paragraph (g) above;  
(i) articles collected in the territory of that Party that can no longer perform  their original purpose nor are capable of being restored or repaired and  are fit only for disposal or recovery of raw materials, or for recycling  purposes4;  
(j) goods obtained or produced in a Party solely from products referred to  in sub-paragraphs (a) to (i) above.  
ARTICLE 4  
Regional Value Content  
1. The regional value content of a good shall be calculated on the basis of the  following method:  
V – VNM 
RVC = ––––––––––– x 100%  
V  
where:  
RVC means the regional value content expressed as a percentage;  
V means the value of the good, as defined in the Agreement on  Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and  Trade 1994, adjusted on a Free On Board (FOB) basis; and  
  
4 This would cover all scrap and waste including scrap and waste resulting from manufacturing or  processing operations or consumption in the same country, scrap machinery, discarded packaging  and all products that can no longer perform the purpose for which they were produced and are fit  only for discarding or for the recovery of raw materials. Such manufacturing or processing operations  shall include all types of processing, not only industrial or chemical but also mining, agriculture,  construction, refining, incineration and sewage treatment operations. 
9  
VNM shall be:  
(i) the Cost, Insurance and Freight (CIF) value at the time of  importation of the materials; or  
(ii) the earliest ascertained price paid for the materials of  undetermined origin in the territory of the Party where the working  or processing takes place.  
2. The percentage of regional value content shall not be less than 40%, except for  the goods listed in Annex 2 (Product Specific Rules), which shall comply with the  Product Specific Rules as provided under Article 6 (Product Specific Rules).  
3. The value of the non-originating materials used by the producer in the  production of a good shall not include, for purposes of calculating the regional value  content of the good, pursuant to paragraph 1, the value of non-originating materials  used to produce originating materials that are subsequently used in the production of  the good.  
4. When the producer of the good acquires a non-originating material within the  Party’s territory where it is located, the value of such material shall not include freight,  insurance, packing costs, and any other costs incurred in transporting the material  from the supplier’s warehouse to the producer’s location.  
ARTICLE 5  
Cumulative Rule of Origin  
Where originating goods or originating materials of a Party are incorporated into a  good in the other Party's territory, the goods or materials so incorporated shall be  regarded to be originating in the latter's territory.  
ARTICLE 6  
Product Specific Rules  
Products which have undergone sufficient transformation in a Party shall be treated  as originating goods of that Party. Products which satisfy the Product Specific Rules  provided for in Annex 2 (Product Specific Rules) shall be considered as goods to which  sufficient transformation has been carried out in a Party.  
ARTICLE 7  
De Minimis  
A good that does not meet tariff classification change requirements, pursuant to the  provisions of Annex 2 (Product Specific Rules), shall nonetheless be considered to be  an originating good if: 
10  
(a) the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of the  product, which do not undergo the applicable change in tariff  classification or fulfil any other condition set out in Annex 2 (Product  Specific Rules), does not exceed 10% of the FOB value of the product;  and  
(b) the product meets all other applicable requirements provided in this  Chapter for qualifying as an originating product.  
The value of such non-originating materials shall, however, be included in calculating  the value of the non-originating materials for any applicable qualifying value content  requirement for the product.  
ARTICLE 8  
Minimal Operations and Processes  
1. The following operations undertaken by themselves shall be considered as  insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products:  
(a) preserving operations to ensure that the products remain in good  condition during transport and storage;  
(b) breaking-up and assembly of packages;  
(c) washing, cleaning, removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;  (d) ironing or pressing of textiles;  
(e) simple painting and polishing operations;  
(f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and  rice;  
(g) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps;  
(h) peeling, stoning and shelling, of fruits, nuts and vegetables;  (i) sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;  
(j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading or matching (including the  making-up of sets of articles);  
(k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on  cards or boards and all other simple packaging operations;  
(l) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs  on products or their packaging;  
(m) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds; 
11  
(n) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article, or  disassembly of products into parts;  
(o) operations whose sole purpose is to ease port handling;  
(p) a combination of two or more operations specified in sub-paragraphs (a)  to (o); and  
(q) slaughter of animals.  
2. For the purposes of this Article:  colour
(a) simple generally describes activities which need neither special skills  nor special machines, apparatus or equipment specially produced or  installed for carrying out the activity; and  
(b) simple mixing generally describes activities which need neither special  skills nor machines, apparatus or equipment especially produced or  installed for carrying out the activity. However, simple mixing does not  include chemical reaction.  
ARTICLE 9  
Direct Consignment  
1. Preferential tariff treatment provided for in this Agreement shall be applied to  goods which satisfy the requirements of this Chapter and are directly consigned  between the Parties.  
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the following shall be considered as  consigned directly from the exporting Party to the importing Party:  
(a) goods that are transported without passing through the territory of a non Party;  
(b) goods whose transport involves transit through one or more non-Parties  with or without trans-shipment or temporary storage of up to three (3)  months in such non-Parties provided that:  
(i) the goods do not enter into trade or commerce there;  
(ii) the goods do not undergo any operation there other than unloading  and reloading, or any operation required to keep them in good  condition; and  
(iii) the transit entry is justified for geographical reasons or by  considerations related exclusively to transport requirements. 
12  
3. Compliance with the provisions set out in paragraph 2(b) shall be authenticated  by the importer presenting to the customs administration of the importing Party either  with customs documents of the non-Parties or with any other documents provided to  the customs administration of the importing Party.  
ARTICLE 10  
Treatment of Packing 
1. Where, for the purposes of assessing customs duties, a Party treats products  separately from their packing, it may also, in respect of its imports consigned from the  other Party, determine separately the origin of such packing.  
2. Where paragraph 1 is not applied, packing shall be considered as forming a  whole with the products and no part of any packing required for their transport or  storage shall be considered as having been imported from a non-Party when  determining the origin of the products as a whole.  
ARTICLE 11  
Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools  
The origin of accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or other information  materials presented with the goods therewith shall be neglected in determining the  origin of the goods, provided that such accessories, spare parts, tools and information  materials are classified and collected customs duties with the goods by the importing  Party.  
ARTICLE 12  
Fungible Products and Materials  
In determining whether a good is an originating good, any interchangeable goods or  materials shall be distinguished by:  
(a) physical separation of the goods or materials; or  
(b) an inventory management method recognised in the generally accepted  accounting principles of the exporting Party.  
ARTICLE 13  
Neutral Elements  
Unless otherwise provided, for the purpose of determining the origin of goods, the  origin of the power and fuel, plant and equipment, or machines and tools used to obtain  the goods, or the materials used in its manufacture which do not remain in the goods  or form part of the goods, shall not be taken into account. 
13  
ARTICLE 14  
Electronic Origin Data Exchange System  
The Parties will develop an Electronic Origin Data Exchange System to ensure the  effective and efficient implementation of this Chapter in a manner jointly determined  by the Parties.  
ARTICLE 15  
Certificate of Origin  
1. For the purpose of obtaining preferential tariff treatment in the other Party, a  Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the authorised body of the exporting Party.  
2. Each Party shall inform the customs administration of the other Party of the  names and addresses of the authorised bodies issuing the Certificate of Origin and  shall provide specimen impressions of official seals used by such authorised bodies.  Any change in names, addresses or official seals shall be promptly notified to the other  Party.  
3. The Certificate of Origin shall be issued before or at the time of exportation  whenever the goods to be exported can be considered originating in that Party subject  to this Chapter. The exporter or producer shall submit a written application for the  Certificate of Origin together with appropriate supporting documents proving that the  products to be exported qualify for the issuance of a Certificate of Origin.  
4. The Certificate of Origin, based on the formats as set out in Annex 3 (Formats  of Certificates of Origin), shall be completed in the English language and duly signed  and stamped, covering one or more goods under one consignment. A Certificate of  Origin is applicable to a single importation of a good into the Party’s territory and shall  remain valid for twelve (12) months from the date of issue.  
5. In cases where a Certificate of Origin has not been issued before or at the time  of exportation due to involuntary errors or omissions or other valid causes, or no later  than three (3) days after the date of shipment, the Certificate of Origin may be issued  retrospectively but not later than one (1) year from the date of shipment, bearing the  words “ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY”.  
6. In cases of theft, loss or accidental destruction of a Certificate of Origin, the  exporter or producer may, within validity of the original Certificate of Origin, make a  written request to the authorised bodies of the exporting Party to issue a certified copy,  provided that the exporter or producer makes sure that the original copy previously  issued has not been used. The certified copy shall bear the words “CERTIFIED TRUE  COPY of the original Certificate of Origin number ___ dated ___”. 
14  
ARTICLE 16  
Claims for Preferential Treatment  
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, each Party’s customs  administration shall require an importer claiming preferential tariff treatment for a good  to:  
(a) make a written declaration before or at the time of importation, in  accordance with its laws and regulations, that the good qualifies as an  originating good;  
(b) have a Certificate of Origin in his possession;  
(c) submit, if required by the importing customs administration, the original  Certificate of Origin 5 and such other documentation relating to the  importation of the good; and  
(d) promptly make a corrected declaration and pay any duties owed, where  the importer has reason to believe that a Certificate of Origin, on which  a declaration was based, contains information that is not correct.  
2. A Party may deny preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement to an  imported good if the importer fails to comply with any requirement of this Chapter.  
3. Each Party shall provide that:  
(a) where the origin of the product is not in doubt, the discovery of minor  discrepancies between the statements made in the Certificate of Origin  and those made in the documents submitted to the customs  administration of the importing Party for the purpose of carrying out the  formalities for importing the products, shall not ipso facto invalidate the  Certificate of Origin, if it does in fact correspond to the same products  presented; and  
(b) for multiple items declared under the same Certificate of Origin, a  problem encountered with one of the items listed shall not affect or delay  the granting of preferential tariff treatment and customs clearance of the  remaining items listed in the Certificate of Origin.  
4. Where a Certificate of Origin is not provided at the time of importation of a good,  the importing Party, upon the request of the importer, may impose the applied non preferential import customs duty or payment of a deposit equivalent to the full duties  on that good as requested. In such a case, the importer will be entitled to a refund of  any excess import customs duty or deposit paid if the payment refund claim is made  within one (1) year from the date the good was imported, provided that the  requirements in paragraph 1 are fulfilled.  
  
5 If all the information pertaining to a Certificate of Origin is exchanged between the customs  administrations of both Parties through the Electronic Origin Data Exchange System as set out in Article  14 (Electronic Origin Data Exchange System), the customs administration of each Party may not require  the importer to submit the original Certificate of Origin on importation. 
15  
ARTICLE 17  
Verification of Origin  
1. A Certificate of Origin is the basis for eligibility of preferential tariff treatment for  goods imported from the exporting Party. In cases where verification is required, the  customs administration of the importing Party may conduct verification by means of:  
(a) written requests for additional information from the importer;  
(b) written requests for additional information from the exporter or producer  in the territory of the exporting Party;  
(c) requests that the customs administration of the exporting Party verify the  origin of a good; or  
(d) such other procedures as the customs administrations of the Parties may  jointly decide.  
2. A verification process under paragraph 1 shall only be initiated when there are  reasonable grounds to doubt the accuracy or authenticity of the origin of the goods  concerned, and when the customs duty is sufficiently material to warrant the request.  
3. A verification request to the customs administration of the exporting Party shall  specify the reasons, and any documents and information obtained justifying the  verification activities shall be forwarded to the customs administration of the requested  Party.  
4. To the extent allowed by its domestic laws and practices, the customs  administration of the exporting Party shall fully cooperate in any action to verify  eligibility.  
5. The customs administration of the Party conducting the verification shall  promptly inform the customs administration of the other Party of the outcome of the  verification conducted.  
ARTICLE 18  
Waiver of Certificate of Origin  
Each Party shall provide that a Certificate of Origin shall not be required for:  
(a) a commercial importation of a good whose value does not exceed  US$600 or its equivalent amount in the Party's currency, or such higher  amount as it may establish, except that it may require that the invoice  accompanying the importation include a statement certifying that the  good qualifies as an originating good; or  
(b) a non-commercial importation of a good whose value does not exceed  US$600 or its equivalent amount in the Party's currency, or such higher  amount as it may establish, 
16  
provided that the importation does not form part of a series of importations that may  reasonably be considered to have been undertaken or arranged for the purpose of  avoiding the certification requirements.  
ARTICLE 19  
Record Keeping Requirement  
1. Each Party shall require its producers, exporters and importers to retain origin  documents for three (3) years.  
2. Each Party shall ensure that its authorised bodies retain copies of Certificates  of Origin and other documentary evidence of origin for three (3) years.  
3. The records to be maintained may include electronic records and shall be  maintained in accordance with the domestic laws and practices of each Party.  
ARTICLE 20  
Confidentiality  
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to furnish or  allow access to confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law  enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or which would prejudice  the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.  
2. Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with its domestic laws, the  confidentiality of information collected pursuant to this Chapter, including information  obtained from the verification of Certificates of Origin, and shall protect that information  from disclosure that could prejudice the competitive position of the persons providing  the information.  
3. Pursuant to Article 19 (Record Keeping Requirement), any information  communicated between the Parties shall be treated as confidential and used for the  validation of Certificates of Origin only.  
ARTICLE 21  
Third Party Invoicing 
The importing Party shall accept Certificates of Origin in cases where the sales invoice  is issued either by a company located in a non-Party or by an exporter in the exporting  Party for the account of the said company, provided that the product meets the  requirements of this Chapter. 
17  
ARTICLE 22  
Committee on Rules of Origin 
1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Rules of Origin under the FTA  Joint Committee, composed of government representatives of each Party.  
2. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the Committee on Rules of Origin shall  meet in regular session at least once a year, preferably together with the FTA Joint  Committee meetings set out in paragraph 4 of Article 111 (Implementation and  Review), to consider any matter arising under this Chapter to ensure that this Chapter  is administered effectively, uniformly and consistently with the spirit and objectives of  this Agreement, and shall cooperate in the administration of this Chapter, including but  not limited to the following:  
(a) keeping the Annexes of this Chapter updated on the basis of the  transposition of the nomenclature established under the Harmonised  Commodity Description and Coding System developed by the World  Customs Organisation;  
(b) consulting to discuss possible amendments or modifications to this  Chapter, taking into account developments in technology, production  processes or other related matters, to be submitted to the FTA Joint  Committee for approval;  
(c) addressing technical issues related to the implementation of this Chapter  and its Annexes, such as change in tariff classification, regional value  content calculation, etc.; and  
(d) addressing technical or implementation aspects of the Electronic Origin  Data Exchange System. 

CHAPTER 5  
CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TRADE FACILITATION  
ARTICLE 1  
Definitions  
For the purposes of this Chapter:  
(a) customs administration means:  
(i) in relation to the People’s Republic of China, the General  Administration of Customs of the People’s Republic of China; and  (ii) in relation to the Republic of Singapore, the Singapore Customs;  
(b) customs law means the statutory and regulatory provisions relating to  the importation, exportation, movement or storage of goods, the  administration and enforcement of which are specifically charged to the  customs administration of a Party, and any regulations made by the  customs administration under its statutory powers;  
(c) customs procedures means the treatment applied by the customs  administration of each Party to goods and the means of transport, which  are subject to that Party’s customs law;  
(d) Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on  Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and  Trade 1994, which is part of the WTO Agreement. and;  
(e) means of transport means various types of vessels, vehicles and  aircrafts which enter or leave the territory carrying persons and/or goods.  
ARTICLE 2  
Objectives  
The objectives of this Chapter are to:  
(a) ensure predictability, consistency and transparency in the application of  the customs laws of the Parties;  
(b) promote efficient, economical administration of customs procedures,  and the expeditious clearance of goods;  
(c) simplify and promote harmonisation of customs procedures of the  Parties; and  
(d) promote cooperation between the customs administrations of the  Parties.
20  
ARTICLE 3  
Scope  
1. This Chapter shall apply to customs procedures applied to goods traded  between the Parties and to the movement of means of transport between the Parties.  
2. This Chapter shall apply in accordance with the Parties’ respective international  obligations and domestic laws and regulations, and within the competence and  available resources of their respective customs administrations.  
ARTICLE 4  
Facilitation  
1. Each Party shall ensure that its customs procedures and practices are  predictable, consistent, transparent and trade facilitating while maintaining appropriate  customs controls.  
2. Each Party shall use efficient customs procedures with the aim to reduce costs  and unnecessary delays in trade between both Parties, based, as appropriate, on  international standards, in particular, trade-related instruments, standards and  recommended practices of the World Customs Organisation, to which that Party is a  contracting Party.  
3. The customs administration of each Party shall periodically review its customs  procedures with a view to exploring options for their simplification and the  enhancement of mutually beneficial arrangements to facilitate international trade.  
4. Each Party shall limit controls, formalities and the number of documents  required in the context of trade in goods between the Parties to those necessary to  ensure compliance with legal requirements.  
5. Each Party shall administer, in a uniform, impartial and reasonable manner, its  customs law relevant to trade between the Parties, and endeavour to ensure  consistency across nationwide implementation of its customs law among its regional  customs offices.  
ARTICLE 5  
Use of Automated Systems  
1. The customs administrations shall use information technology to support  customs operations, including sharing of best practices for the purposes of improving  their customs procedures, where it is cost effective and efficient, particularly in the  paperless trading context taking into account development in this area within the World  Customs Organisation (the “WCO”). 
21  
2. In using information technology to support customs operations, the customs  administration of each Party shall take into account:  
(a) their available infrastructure and capabilities; and  
(b) the relevant standards such as the WCO Data Model and best practices  recommended by the WCO.  
ARTICLE 6  
Single Window  
1. Each Party shall establish or maintain a single window, enabling traders to  submit documentation and/or data requirements for importation, exportation or transit  of goods through a single entry point to the participating authorities or agencies. After  the examination by the participating authorities or agencies of the documentation  and/or data, the results shall be notified to the applicants through the single window in  a timely manner.  
2. In cases where documentation and/or data requirements have already been  received through the single window, the same documentation and/or data  requirements shall not be requested by participating authorities or agencies except in  urgent circumstances and other limited exceptions which are made public.  
3. Each Party shall, to the extent possible and practicable, use information  technology to support its single window.  
ARTICLE 7  
Customs Valuation  
The Parties shall apply Article VII of GATT 1994 and the Customs Valuation  Agreement to goods traded between them.  
ARTICLE 8  
Tariff Classification  
The Parties shall apply the International Convention on the Harmonised Commodity  Description and Coding System to goods traded between them.  
ARTICLE 9  
Publication and Enquiry Points 
22  
1. Each Party shall publish, including on the Internet, its laws, regulations, and  where applicable, administrative rules or procedures, of general application, relevant  to trade in goods between the Parties.  
2. Each Party shall designate and maintain one or more enquiry points to address  enquiries from interested persons pertaining to customs matters, and shall make  available on the Internet information concerning the procedures for making such  inquiries.  
3. For greater certainty, nothing in this Article or in any part of this Agreement shall  require any Party to publish law enforcement procedures and internal operational  guidelines including those related to conducting risk analysis and targeting  methodology.  
ARTICLE 10  
Risk Management  
1. The customs administration of each Party shall, based on risk management,  determine which persons, goods or means of transport are to be examined and the  extent of such examination.  
2. The Parties shall adopt a risk management approach in determining the risk  profile of goods to facilitate the clearance of low-risk consignments, while focusing its  control measures on high-risk goods.  
3. The Parties shall exchange best practices on risk management techniques  used for customs purposes.  
ARTICLE 11  
Advance Rulings  
1. Each Party shall issue an advance ruling, prior to the importation of a good into  its territory, at the written request containing all necessary information, on an  application of the exporter, importer or any person with a justifiable cause or a  representative thereof1, with respect to:  
(a) origin of goods;  
(b) tariff classification of a product; and  
(c) the appropriate method or criteria, and the application thereof, to be used  for determining the customs value under a particular set of facts, in  accordance with the provisions of the Customs Valuation Agreement.  
2. The importing Party shall issue an advance ruling within sixty (60) days on  receipt of all necessary information.  
  
1 An applicant for an advance ruling from China shall be registered with China Customs. 
23  
3. The customs administration of each Party shall establish a validity period for an  advance ruling of three (3) years from the date of its issuance.  
4. The importing Party may modify or revoke an advance ruling:  
(a) if the advance ruling was based on an error of fact;  
(b) if there is a change in the material facts or circumstances on which the  advance ruling was based;  
(c) to conform with a change in its domestic laws, a judicial decision or a  modification of this Chapter; or  
(d) if incorrect information was provided or relevant information was  withheld.  
5. Each Party shall provide that any modification or revocation of an advance  ruling shall be effective on the date on which the modification or revocation is issued,  or on such later date as may be specified therein, and shall not be applied to  importations of a good that have occurred prior to that date, unless the person to whom  the advance ruling was issued has not acted in accordance with its terms and  conditions.  
ARTICLE 12  
Penalties  
Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures that provide for the imposition of civil,  criminal or administrative penalties where appropriate, for violations of its laws and  regulations relating to this Chapter in accordance with its domestic legislation.  
ARTICLE 13  
Review and Appeal  
1. Each Party shall, in accordance with its domestic laws and regulations, provide  that the importer, exporter or any other person affected by its administrative  determinations or decisions on a customs matter, have access to:  
(a) a level of administrative review 2 by its customs administration  independent of the official or office responsible for the administrative  determinations or decisions under review; and  
(b) judicial appeal or review of the determinations or decisions, subject to its  laws and regulations.  
2. The decision on review and/or appeal shall be given to the applicant and/or  appellant and, subject to the Party’s domestic laws and regulations the reasons for  such decision shall be provided in writing.  
  
2 For Singapore, the level of administrative review may include the Ministry supervising the customs  administration. 
24  
ARTICLE 14  
Pre-Arrival Processing  
1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures allowing for the submission of  import documentation and other required information in order to begin processing prior  to the arrival of goods with a view to expediting the release of goods upon arrival.  
2. Each Party shall, as appropriate, provide for advance lodging of documents in  electronic format for pre-arrival processing of such documents.  
ARTICLE 15  
Release of Goods  
1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain simplified customs procedures for the  efficient release of goods in order to facilitate trade between the Parties. For greater  certainty, this paragraph shall not require a Party to release a good if its requirements  for release have not been met.  
2. In accordance with paragraph 1, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures  that:  
(a) provide for the release of goods within a period of time no greater than  that required to ensure compliance with its customs law, and to the  extent possible, within forty-eight (48) hours of goods’ arrival, provided  all necessary regulatory and examination requirements have been met;  and  
  
(b) allow importers who have complied with that Party’s procedures relating  to the determination of value and payment of duty to withdraw goods  from customs, provided that all necessary regulatory and examination  requirements have been met. As a condition for such release, a Party  may require an importer to provide a guarantee, when such guarantee  is required to ensure that obligations arising from the entry of the goods  will be fulfilled. A Party may require a guarantee in accordance with its  domestic laws and regulations that does not exceed the amount the  Party requires to ensure payment of customs duties, taxes, fees and  charges ultimately due for the goods covered by the guarantee.  
3. If any goods are selected for further examination, such an examination shall be  limited to what is necessary and shall be completed without undue delay.  
ARTICLE 16  
Express Shipments 
25  
Each Party shall adopt or maintain separate and expedited customs procedures for  express shipments while maintaining appropriate control and customs selection. Such  procedures shall:  
(a) permit, as a condition for release, the submission of a single document  in the form that the Party considers appropriate, such as a manifest or a  declaration, covering all of the goods in an express shipment, through, if  possible, electronic means;  
(b) minimise, to the extent possible, the documentation required for the  release of express shipments; and  
(c) allow express shipments to be released under normal circumstances as  rapidly as possible after goods’ arrival, provided all necessary customs  documentation required for release have been submitted, and when  possible within six (6) hours.  
ARTICLE 17  
Post-Clearance Audit  
1. With a view to expediting the release of goods and enhancing customs control,  each Party shall adopt or maintain post clearance audit to ensure compliance with  customs law and other related laws and regulations.  
2. Each Party shall select a person or a consignment for post-clearance audit in a  risk-based manner, which may include appropriate selectivity criteria. Each Party shall  conduct post clearance audits in a transparent manner. Where the person is involved  in the audit process and a conclusive result has been achieved, the Party shall, without  delay, notify the person concerned of the result of the case, the rights and obligations  it has, audit findings and the reasons for the result.  
3. Parties shall, wherever practicable, use the result of post-clearance audit in  applying risk management and in assessing the customs compliance records of  traders.  
ARTICLE 18  
Temporary Admission of Goods  
Each Party shall allow, as provided for in its laws and regulations, goods to be brought  into its customs territory conditionally relieved, totally or partially, from payment of  import duties and taxes if such goods are brought into its customs territory for a specific  purpose, are intended for re-exportation within a specific period, and have not  undergone any change except normal depreciation and wastage due to the use made  of them.  
ARTICLE 19  
Customs Cooperation 
26  
1. Subject to its domestic laws and regulations, the customs administration of  each Party may, as deemed appropriate, assist each other in relation to:  
(a) the implementation and operation of this Chapter; and  
(b) such other issues as the Parties mutually determine.  
2. Each Party shall endeavour to provide the other Party with timely notice of any  significant modification of its customs law or customs procedures that are likely to  substantially affect the operation of this Agreement.  
ARTICLE 20  
Consultation  
1. The customs administration of each Party may at any time request  consultations with the customs administration of the other Party, on any matter arising  from the implementation or operation of this Chapter, where there are reasonable  grounds provided by the requesting Party. Such consultations shall be conducted  through the relevant contact points, and shall take place within sixty (60) days of the  request, or any other possible time period that the Parties may mutually determine.  
2. In the event that such consultations fail to resolve any such matter, the  requesting Party may refer the matter to the Committee on Customs Procedures and  Trade Facilitation for further consideration.  
3. The customs administration of each Party shall designate one or more contact  points for the purposes of this Chapter. Information on the contact points shall be  provided to the other Party and any amendment of the said information shall be notified  promptly.  
ARTICLE 21  
Committee on Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation  
1. With the view to the effective implementation and operation of this Chapter, a  Committee on Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation (Committee on CPTF) is  hereby established, under the FTA Joint Committee.  
2. The functions of the Committee on CPTF shall be as follows:  
(a) ensure the proper function of this Chapter and resolve all issues arising  from its application;  
(b) review the interpretation and implementation of this Chapter, as well as  revise this Chapter as appropriate;  
(c) ensure the effective, uniform and consistent administration of this  Chapter, and enhance the cooperation in this regard; 
27  
(d) identify areas related to this Chapter to be improved for facilitating trade  between the Parties;  
(e) exchange information on customs strategic development of each Party  to strengthen cooperation between the two Parties; and  
(f) make recommendations and report to the FTA Joint Committee.  
3. The Committee on CPTF shall consist of representatives from customs  administrations of both Parties. When both Parties deem necessary and appropriate,  representatives from other relevant government agencies or relevant non-government  organisations may be invited to the meetings of the Committee on CPTF. One or more  contact points shall be designated for this purpose.  
4. The Committee on CPTF shall meet at such venues and times as the Parties  may mutually agree.        

CHAPTER 6  
TRADE REMEDIES  
ARTICLE 1  
Definitions  
For the purposes of this Chapter:  
(a) Anti-Dumping Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of  Article VI of the GATT 1994, which is part of the WTO Agreement;  
(b) domestic industry means, with respect to an imported product, the  producers as a whole of the like or directly competitive product or those  producers whose collective production of the like or directly competitive  product constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic production  of such product;  
(c) Safeguards Agreement means the Agreement on Safeguards, which is  part of the WTO Agreement;  
(d) SCM Agreement means the Agreement on Subsidies and  Countervailing Measures, which is part of the WTO Agreement;  
(e) serious injury means a significant overall impairment in the position of  a domestic industry;  
(f) threat of serious injury means serious injury that, on the basis of facts  and not merely on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility, is clearly  imminent; and  
(g) working days means calendar days other than Saturdays, Sundays and  public holidays of the Party initiating an anti-dumping investigation.  
ARTICLE 2  
General Provisions  
1. The Parties agree and reaffirm their commitments to abide by their rights and  obligations under the Anti-Dumping Agreement, the SCM Agreement, Article XIX of  the GATT 1994, and the Safeguards Agreement.  
2. The Parties agree to carry out any action taken pursuant to this Chapter in a  transparent manner. 
30  
ARTICLE 3  
Cooperation and Consultation  
1. Each Party shall designate one or more contact points for the purposes of this  Chapter and provide details of such contact points to the other Party. The Parties shall  notify each other promptly of any amendments to the details of their contact points.  
2. A Party may request consultations with the other Party on matters arising from  the operation of this Chapter. Such consultations shall be conducted through the  relevant contact points, and shall take place within forty-five (45) days of the request,  unless the Parties mutually determine otherwise.  
ARTICLE 4  
Anti-Dumping  
1. Each Party agrees to strictly abide by the Anti-Dumping Agreement in any anti dumping proceedings against any product of the other Party.  
2. The Parties agree to observe the following practices in anti-dumping cases  between them:  
(a) Without prejudice to the relevant provisions of the Anti-Dumping  Agreement regarding notification at the initiation stage to the exporting  WTO Member whose export product is under investigation, following the  acceptance of a properly documented application from an industry in one  Party for the initiation of an anti-dumping investigation in respect of  products from the other Party, the Party that has accepted the properly  documented application should, at least seven (7) days in advance of  the date of initiation of the investigation procedure, notify the other Party.  
(b) The investigating authority of a Party shall, in the public notice on the  initiation of an investigation, give interested parties a period of no less  than twenty (20) days after the date of initiation to notify the latter’s  intention to participate in the proceeding, to provide the relevant  information1 and to comment on the information contained in the notice  of initiation, such as the representativeness of the applicant, the scope  of the product under consideration and the evidence given to justify the  initiation of the investigation. The investigating authority shall take due  account of such comments. Within ten (10) working days after the expiry  of the aforementioned period, the investigating authority shall make  available the model questionnaires to the other Party and other  interested parties (and notify them if the model questionnaires are  published on the Internet).  
  
1 Information may include, but not be limited to: name, address, legal representative, contact details  and contact person of the interested party, total volume and value of the product under investigation  exported to the investigating Party during the investigation period, and the official seal of the interested  party or signature of the legal representative. 
31  
(c) A Party’s investigating authority shall take due account of any difficulties  experienced by one or more exporters of the other Party in supplying  information requested and provide any assistance practicable; on  request of an exporter of the other Party, a Party’s investigating authority  shall make available the timeframes, procedures and, subject to that  Party’s laws or regulations relating to confidential information, any  documents necessary for the offering of an undertaking.  
ARTICLE 5  
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures  
1. Each Party agrees to strictly abide by the SCM Agreement in any countervailing  proceedings against any product of the other Party.  
2. Neither Party shall introduce or maintain any form of export subsidy on any  goods destined for the territory of the other Party.  
ARTICLE 6  
Global Safeguard Measures  
1. A Party taking any measure pursuant to Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the  Safeguards Agreement may exclude imports of an originating product from the other  Party from the action if such imports are non-injurious.  
2. A Party shall advise the relevant contact points of the other Party of any  safeguard action on the initiation of an investigation and the reasons for it.  
ARTICLE 7  
Bilateral Safeguard Measures  
1. A Party shall have the right to initiate a bilateral safeguard measure on a product  within the transition period for that product. The transition period for a product shall  begin from the date of entry into force of this Agreement and end five (5) years from  the date of completion of tariff elimination for that product.  
2. A Party shall be free to take a bilateral safeguard measure, if, as a result of the  reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement, an originating  product of the other Party is being imported into the territory of a Party in such  increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic production, and under  such conditions that the imports of such originating product from the other Party  constitute a substantial cause of serious injury, or threat thereof, to a domestic industry  producing a like or directly competitive product. Such Party may apply a safeguard  measure as set by increasing the tariff rate applicable to such originating product  during the transition period to the WTO MFN tariff rate applied to such product at the  time when the measure is taken.  
3. In applying the bilateral safeguard measure, the Parties shall adopt the rules  for the application of safeguard measures as provided for under the Safeguards 
32  
Agreement with the exception of the quantitative restriction measures set out in Article  5 of the Safeguards Agreement, and Articles 9, 13 and 14 of the Safeguards  Agreement. As such, all other provisions of the Safeguards Agreement shall, mutatis mutandis, be incorporated into and form an integral part of this Agreement.  
4. Notwithstanding the above, no safeguard measure shall be applied against a  product originating in a Party as long as its share of the total imports of the product  concerned in the importing Party does not exceed 3%.  
5. The safeguard measure may be maintained for an initial period of up to three  (3) years and may be extended for a period not exceeding one (1) year.  Notwithstanding the duration of a safeguard measure on a product, such measure  shall terminate at the end of the transition period for that product.  
6. Upon the termination of the measure, the tariff rate applicable to the originating  product shall be the rate which would have been in effect but for the measure.  
7. The Party applying a measure described in paragraph 1 shall, in consultation  with the other Party, provide to the other Party mutually agreed trade liberalising  compensation in accordance with Article 8 of the Safeguards Agreement. The form of  concessions shall have substantially equivalent trade effects or be equivalent to the  value of the additional duties expected to result from the measure. If the Parties are  unable to agree on compensation within forty-five (45) days in the consultations under  paragraph 3, the Party against whose originating product the measure is applied may  take action with respect to originating products of the other Party that has trade effects  substantially equivalent to the measure. The Party taking such action shall apply the  action only for the minimum period necessary to achieve the substantially equivalent  effects, and in any event, only while the measure under paragraph 1 is being applied.  
8. A Party shall not impose a bilateral safeguard measure in addition to any global  safeguard measures on the same product pursuant to the Safeguards Agreement. 

           CHAPTER 7 TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE,
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES


ARTICLE 44
Definitions

1. The definitions in Annex A of the WTO Agreement on Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (the "SPS Agreement") and Annex 1 of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (the "TBT Agreement") shall apply to this Chapter.

2. All definitions provided in the Annexes to this Chapter shall apply only to the respective Annexes.

3. For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) SPS refers to sanitary and phytosanitary measures; and

(b) TBT refers to technical barriers to trade.


ARTICLE 45
Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are:

(a) to improve the implementation of the SPS Agreement and the TBT Agreement between the Parties, so as to avoid unnecessary barriers to bilateral trade, to promote and facilitate bilateral trade, while protecting human, animal or plant life or health or fulfilling other legitimate objectives1;

(b) to strengthen mutual understanding of the Parties' administrative systems by establishing a framework for communication and co- operation, and to resolve relevant issues arising from bilateral trade in a prompt and efficient manner, to expand the opportunities for bilateral trade.


ARTICLE 46
Scope and Coverage




1    As understood under Article 2.2 of the TBT Agreement.

This Chapter applies to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures, technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures of a Party which may, directly or indirectly, affect trade between the Parties.


ARTICLE 47
Competent Authorities and Contact Points

1. The competent authorities of the Parties are the authorities responsible for the implementation of this Chapter. The contact points of the Parties are the agencies responsible for the communication and notification of information between the Parties, as specified in Annex 4 (Contact Points for TBT and SPS).

2. The Parties shall notify each other of any significant change in the structures, organisations and divisions of the competent authorities and contact points.


ARTICLE 48
Reaffirmation

The Parties reaffirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other under the TBT Agreement and the SPS Agreement.


ARTICLE 49
Regionalisation

1. The Parties agree to properly and actively resolve the quarantine issues of concern to each other related to the import and export of agricultural products of both Parties in accordance with Article 6 of the SPS Agreement.

2. The exporting Party may request the importing Party to recognise its pest- free or disease-free status in all or part of its territory. The importing Party shall give favourable consideration to such request and, following an assessment, may agree to recognise such pest-free or disease-free status of the exporting Party in accordance with paragraph 1. After confirmation of the pest-free or disease-free status, the importing Party shall allow agricultural products originating from these areas of the exporting Party into its markets, in accordance with the importing Party's SPS requirements.

3. If the importing Party considers that a risk with respect to a disease or pest outbreak may exist in a part or parts of the territory of the exporting Party where agricultural products destined for the importing Party originate, the importing Party may request the exporting Party to reaffirm this free status. The importing Party may also request the exporting Party to take specific eradication

and control measures to ensure that the free status is maintained and to ensure that agricultural products originated therein meet the SPS requirements of the importing Party.

4. Any agreement or arrangement on regionalisation which may be concluded between the Parties under this Agreement shall be placed in the Annexes in accordance with Article 58 (Final Provisions on Annexes).


ARTICLE 50
Exchange of Information and Cooperation

1. The Parties shall strengthen the exchange of information and co-operation in the areas of mutual interest relating to TBT and SPS, such as:

(a) inspection and quarantine of animals, plants and their products;

(b) quality and safety control of products;

(c) procedure and processing period of approval of food establishments;

(d) technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures; and

(e) sharing of experience  in the  implementation of the  principle  of transparency by their respective enquiry points under the TBT Agreement and SPS Agreement.

2. Each Party shall, on request, give positive consideration to proposals to supplement existing co-operation on standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures. Such co-operation, which shall be on mutually agreed terms and conditions, may include but are not limited to advice or technical co-operation relating to the development or application of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures.

3. The Parties shall strengthen co-operation and communication of experience and expertise in addressing TBT and SPS measures affecting both Parties.


ARTICLE 51
International Standards

1. The Parties shall use international standards, or the relevant parts of international standards, as a basis for their technical regulations and related

conformity assessment procedures where relevant international standards exist or their completion is imminent, except when such international standards or their relevant parts are ineffective or inappropriate to fulfil legitimate objectives.

2. The Parties shall co-operate with each other, where appropriate, in the context of their participation in international standardising bodies, to ensure that international standards developed within such bodies, that are likely to become a basis for technical regulations, are trade facilitating and do not create unnecessary obstacles to international trade.

3. The Parties shall strengthen communications and co-ordination with each other, where appropriate, in the context of discussions on standards and related issues in the TBT Committee under the TBT Agreement and the SPS Committee under the SPS Agreement and other relevant international or regional fora.


ARTICLE 52
Conformity Assessment Procedure

1. The Parties recognise the differences between their legal systems regarding conformity assessment and agree to discuss the possibility of mutual recognition of conformity assessment in accordance with the TBT Agreement.

2. The Parties shall exchange information on conformity assessment procedures including testing, inspection, certification, accreditation and metrology with a view to promoting the recognition of conformity assessment procedures between the Parties.

3. A Party shall give favourable consideration to a request by the other Party to recognise the conformity assessment procedures conducted by bodies in the other Party's territory through a mutual recognition agreement or arrangement.

4. Any agreement or arrangement on mutual recognition of conformity assessment procedures concluded between the Parties under this Agreement shall be specified in the Annexes in accordance with Article 58 (Final Provisions on Annexes).


ARTICLE 53
Equivalence

1. The Parties shall give favourable consideration to accepting the equivalence of each other's technical regulations and SPS measures consistent with the purpose of this Chapter, the TBT Agreement and the SPS Agreement.

2. Any agreement or arrangement on acceptance of equivalence of each other's technical regulations and SPS measures which may be concluded between the Parties under this Agreement shall be placed in the Annexes in accordance with Article 58 (Final Provisions on Annexes).


ARTICLE 54
Transparency

1. The Parties shall notify each other through their respective TBT and SPS enquiry points, under the TBT Agreement and the SPS Agreement, of any new technical regulation and SPS measure related to the trade of products in accordance with the TBT Agreement and the SPS Agreement, or any change to them. Each Party shall allow at least sixty (60) days for the other Party to present comments in writing on any notification except where considerations of health, safety, environmental protection or national security arise or threaten to arise to warrant more urgent action.

2. Each Party shall make available to the other Party, electronically or in any other form, up-to-date publications on technical regulations and any relevant conformity assessment procedures that are cited in, or may be used to comply with, those technical regulations. Each Party shall make known to the other Party the relevant standards that are cited in, or may be used to comply with, those technical regulations.


ARTICLE 55
Joint Working Group

1. The Parties hereby establish the Joint Working Group on TBT and SPS, comprising representatives from the relevant regulatory authorities of each Party.

2. The Joint Working Group shall be led and co-ordinated by co-chairs from both Parties.

3. The Joint Working Group shall be established no later than one (1) year following the date of entry into force of this Agreement. The meeting of the Joint Working Group shall take place once a year, back-to-back with the meetings of the FTA Joint Committee established under Article 111 (Implementation and Review), unless otherwise agreed by the Parties.

4. The functions of the Joint Working Group shall include:

(a) administering and supervising the implementation of this Chapter;

(b) addressing any issue and dispute arising from the implementation of this Chapter and its Annexes;

(c) reviewing this Chapter and its Annexes, making supplementary attachments and Annexes where necessary;

(d) where appropriate, facilitating co-operation in specific areas among accreditation and conformity assessment bodies in the Parties' territories;

(e) ensuring the Parties' relevant regulatory authorities negotiate on the priority issues identified by the Joint Study Report on a Free Trade Agreement between China and Singapore in an appropriate manner, in particular, mutual recognition of conformity assessment procedures on electrical and electronic equipment, regionalisation, mutual recognition  of conformity assessment  procedures on telecommunications equipment and equivalence;

(f) where appropriate, strengthening the exchange of information with regard to the activities of non-governmental, regional, and multilateral fora related to standardisation, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures; and

(g) reporting to the FTA Joint Committee on the implementation of this Chapter when appropriate.

5. Each Party shall, upon request, give favourable consideration to any sector-specific proposal made by the other Party for further co-operation under this Chapter.


ARTICLE 56
Confidentiality

1. Where a Party provides information to the other Party in accordance with this Agreement and designates the information as confidential, the other Party shall maintain the confidentiality of such information. Such information shall be used only for the purposes specified, and shall not be otherwise disclosed without the specific permission of the Party providing the information.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require either Party to furnish or allow access to information, the disclosure of which it considers would:

(a) be contrary to its essential security interests;

(b) be contrary to the public interest as determined by its domestic laws, regulations and administrative provisions;

(c) be contrary to any of its domestic laws, regulations and administrative provisions including but not limited to those protecting personal privacy or the financial affairs and accounts of individual customers of financial institutions;

(d) impede law enforcement; or

(e) prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular public or private enterprises.


ARTICLE 57
Preservation of Regulatory Authority

1. Each Party retains all authority under its laws to interpret and implement its technical regulations and SPS measures.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall:

(a) prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining, in accordance with its international rights and obligations, technical regulations and SPS measures, as appropriate to its particular national circumstances;

(b) prevent a Party from adopting technical regulations and SPS measures to ensure the quality of its imports and exports, or for the protection of human, animal or plant life or health, or the environment, or for the prevention of deceptive practices or to fulfil other legitimate objectives2;

(c) limit the authority of a Party to take all appropriate measures whenever it ascertains that products may not conform with its technical regulations and SPS measures. Such measures may include withdrawing the products from the market, prohibiting their placement on the market, restricting their free movement, initiating a product recall, initiating legal proceedings or otherwise preventing the recurrence of such problems including through a prohibition on imports. If a Party takes such measures, it shall notify the other Party within fifteen (15) working days of taking the measures, giving its reasons;





2    As understood under Article 2.2 of the TBT Agreement.

(d) oblige a Party to recognise the standards or technical regulations or SPS measures of the other Party as equivalent; or

(e) affect the rights and obligations of either Party as a member of the TBT Agreement or the SPS Agreement.


ARTICLE 58
Final Provisions on Annexes3

1. The Parties may, upon request, commence discussions to explore the possibility of establishing additional Annexes of mutual interest after the signing of this Agreement.

2. Where urgent problems of safety, health, consumer or environmental protection or national security arise or threaten to arise for a Party, that Party may suspend the operation of any Annex, in whole or in part, immediately. In such a case, the Party shall immediately advise the other Party of the nature of the urgent problem, the products covered and the objective and rationale of the suspension.

3. For the purposes of this Chapter, an Annex shall provide, but is not limited to, the following details:

(a) the regulatory authorities designated by each Party;

(b) the detailed implementing arrangements; and

(c) the provisions for entry into force and/or termination.

3    Annexes to this Chapter include Sectoral Annexes.


CHAPTER 8 
CROSS-BORDER TRADE IN SERVICES 
Article 1 
Definitions 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
(a) cross-border trade in services or cross-border supply of services is  defined as the supply of a service: 
(i) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party; 
(ii) in the territory of a Party by a person of that Party to a service  consumer of the other Party; or 
(iii) by a service supplier of a Party, through presence of natural persons  of a Party in the territory of the other Party, 
but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by a  covered investment as defined in Section C (Definitions) of Chapter 10  (Investment); 
(b) enterprise means an entity constituted or organised under applicable law,  whether or not for profit, and whether privately or governmentally owned or  controlled, including a corporation, trust, partnership, sole proprietorship,  joint venture, association, or similar organisation; and a branch of an  enterprise; 
(c) enterprise of a Party means an enterprise organised or constituted under  the laws of a Party, or a branch located in the territory of a Party and  carrying out business activities there;
22 
(d) existing means in effect on the date of entry into force of 2023 Protocol; 
(e) measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law,  regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other  form; 
(f) measures by Parties means measures taken by: 
(i) central, regional or local governments and authorities; and 
(ii) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by  central, regional or local governments or authorities; 
(g) monopoly supplier of a service means any person, public or private,  which in the relevant market of the territory of a Party is authorised or  established formally or in effect by that Party as the sole supplier of that  service; 
(h) natural person of a Party means a national or a permanent resident of a  Party under its laws. Until such time as China enacts its law on treatment  of permanent residents of foreign countries, the obligations of each Party  with respect to the permanent residents of the other Party shall be limited  to the extent of its obligations under the GATS; 
(i) person means either a natural person or an enterprise; 
(j) qualification procedures means administrative procedures relating to the  administration of qualification requirements; 
(k) qualification requirements means substantive requirements which a  service supplier is required to fulfil in order to obtain certification or a licence; 
(l) services includes any service in any sector except services supplied in the  exercise of governmental authority;
23 
(m) service consumer means any person that receives or uses a service; (n) service of the other Party means a service which is supplied: 
(i) from or in the territory of the other Party, or in the case of maritime  transport, by a vessel registered under the laws of the other Party, or  by a person of the other Party which supplies the service through the  operation of a vessel or its use in whole or in part; or 
(ii) in the case of the supply of a service through the presence of natural  persons, by a service supplier of the other Party; 
(o) service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means any  service which is supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in competition  with one or more service suppliers; 
(p) service supplier means any person that seeks to supply or supplies a  service; and 
(q) supply of a service includes the production, distribution, marketing, sale  and delivery of a service.
24 
Article 2 
Scope and Coverage 
1. This Chapter applies to measures by a Party affecting cross-border trade in  services by service suppliers of the other Party. Such measures include measures  affecting: 
(a) the purchase, payment or use of a service; 
(b) the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a service, services  which are required by the Parties to be offered to the public generally; 
(c) the presence in its territory of a service supplier of the other Party;  
(d) the provision of a bond or other form of financial security as a condition for  the supply of a service. 
  
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1,1 2Articles 3 (Market Access) and 8 (Domestic  Regulation) shall also apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party affecting  the supply of a service in its territory by a covered investment as defined in Section C  (Definitions) of Chapter 10 (Investment). 
3. This Agreement shall not apply to: 
(a) services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority within the  territory of each Party; and 
(b) regulations or requirements governing the procurement by governmental  agencies of services purchased for governmental purposes and not with a  view to commercial resale or with a view to use in the supply of services for  commercial sale. 
4. This Chapter shall not apply to subsidies or grants provided by a Party, or to any  conditions attached to the receipt or continued receipt of such subsidies or grants,  whether or not such subsidies or grants are offered exclusively to domestic services,  
1 For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter is subject to investor-state dispute settlement under  Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) of Chapter 10 (Investment).
25 
service consumers or service suppliers except: 
(a) as otherwise specified in this Agreement; or  
(b) disciplines that may be developed under Article XV of the GATS as may  be reviewed with a view to their incorporation into this Agreement.  
5. This Chapter shall not apply to air services, including domestic and international  air transportation services, whether scheduled or non-scheduled, and related services  in support of air services; other than measures affecting: 
(a) aircraft repair and maintenance services; 
(b) the selling and marketing of air transport services; and 
(c) computer reservation system (“CRS”) services. 
Article 3 
Market Access 
A Party shall not maintain or adopt, either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on  the basis of its entire territory, measures that: 
(a) impose limitations on: 
(i) the number of service suppliers, whether in the form of numerical  quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers, or the requirement of  an economic needs test; 
(ii) the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of  numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; 
(iii) the total number of service operations or the total quantity of services  output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of  quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;23 
(iv) the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a  particular service sector or that a service supplier may employ and  
23 Paragraph (a)(iii) does not cover measures by a Party which limit inputs for the supply of services.
26 
who are necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific  service in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an  economic needs test; and 
(b) restrict or require specific types of legal entities or joint ventures through  which a service supplier may supply a service. 
Article 4 
National Treatment34 
1. Each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the other Party  treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances,45to its own  service suppliers. 
2. For greater certainty, the treatment to be accorded by a Party under paragraph  1 means, with respect to a regional level of government, treatment no less favourable  than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by that regional  level of government to service suppliers of the Party of which it forms a part. 
Article 5  
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment 
1. Each Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of the other Party  treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to service  suppliers of a non-Party.  
2. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed as to prevent a Party from  conferring or according advantages to adjacent countries in order to facilitate  exchanges limited to contiguous frontier zones of services that are both locally  produced and consumed. 
Article 6 
Local Presence 
3 4 Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require any Party to compensate for any inherent  competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of the relevant services or service  suppliers. 
4 For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under Article 4 (National  Treatment) or Article 5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) depends on the totality of the circumstances,  including whether the relevant treatment distinguishes between services and service suppliers on the  basis of legitimate public welfare objectives.
27 
A Party shall not require a service supplier of the other Party to establish or maintain  a representative office or any form of enterprise, or to be resident, in its territory as a  condition for the cross-border supply of a service. 
Article 7 
Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures 
1. Article 3 (Market Access), Article 4 (National Treatment), Article 5 (Most-Favoured Nation Treatment) and Article 6 (Local Presence) shall not apply to: 
(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at: 
(i) the central level of government, as set out by that Party in List I of its  Schedule in Annex 5 (Schedules of Reservations and Non Conforming Measures); 
(ii) a regional level of government, as set out by that Party in List I of its  Schedule in Annex 5 (Schedules of Reservations and Non Conforming Measures); or 
(iii) a local level of government;  
(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure  referred to in sub-paragraph (a); or 
(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in sub paragraph (a), to the extent that the amendment does not decrease the  conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment,  with Article 3 (Market Access), Article 4 (National Treatment), Article 5  (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) and Article 6 (Local Presence). 
2. Article 3 (Market Access), Article 4 (National Treatment), Article 5 (Most Favoured-Nation Treatment) and Article 6 (Local Presence) shall not apply to any  measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, sub-sectors, or  activities as set out by that Party in List II of its Schedule in Annex 5 (Schedules of  Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures). 
Article 8 
Domestic Regulation 
1. Each Party shall ensure that all measures of general application affecting trade  in services are administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial manner.
28 
2. (a) Each Party shall maintain or institute as soon as practicable, judicial, arbitral  or administrative tribunals or procedures which provide, at the request of  an affected service supplier, for the prompt review of, and where justified,  appropriate remedies for, administrative decisions affecting trade in  services. Where such procedures are not independent of the agency  entrusted with the administrative decision concerned, the Party shall ensure  that the procedures in fact provide for an objective and impartial review. 
(b) The provisions of sub-paragraph (a) shall not be construed to require a  Party to institute such tribunals or procedures where this would be  inconsistent with its constitutional structure or the nature of its legal system. 
3. Where a Party requires authorisation for the supply of a service, it shall ensure  that its competent authorities: 
(a) in the case of an incomplete application and at the request of the applicant,  identify all the additional information that is required to complete the  application and provide the opportunity to remedy deficiencies within a  reasonable timeframe; 
(b) at the request of the applicant, provide, without undue delay, information  concerning the status of the application; and 
(c) if an application is terminated or denied, to the maximum extent possible,  inform the applicant in writing and without delay the reasons for such action.  The applicant will have the possibility of resubmitting, at its discretion, a  new application. 
4. With the objective of ensuring that measures relating to qualification  requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements do not  constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in services, the Parties shall jointly review the  results of the negotiations on disciplines on these measures, pursuant to paragraph 4  of Article VI of the GATS, with a view to their incorporation into this Agreement. The  Parties note that such disciplines aim to ensure that such requirements are, inter alia: 
(a) based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and the  ability to supply the service; 
(b) not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service;  and 
(c) in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves a restriction on the  supply of the service.
29 
5. (a) Pending the incorporation of the disciplines referred to in paragraph 4, a  Party shall not apply licensing and qualification requirements and technical  standards that nullify or impair its obligations under this Agreement in a  manner which: 
(i) does not comply with the criteria outlined in paragraphs 4(a), (b) or (c);  and 
(ii) could not reasonably have been expected of that Party at the time the  obligations were undertaken. 
(b) In determining whether a Party is in conformity with the obligation under  paragraph 5(a), account shall be taken of international standards of relevant  international organisations56applied by that Party. 
6. In sectors where obligations regarding professional services are undertaken,  each Party shall provide for adequate procedures to verify the competence of  professionals of the other Party.  
7. Paragraphs 1 to 6 shall not apply to a sector or measure to the extent that such  sector or measure is not subject to Article 3 (Market Access), Article 4 (National  Treatment), Article 5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) or Article 6 (Local Presence)  by reason of a Party’s commitments made in accordance with Article 7 (Reservations  and Non-Conforming Measures). 
Article 9 
Recognition 
1. For the purposes of the fulfilment, in whole or in part, of its standards or criteria  for the authorisation, licensing or certification of service suppliers, and subject to the  requirements of paragraph 4, a Party may recognise, or encourage its relevant  competent bodies to recognise, the education or experience obtained, requirements  met or licences or certifications granted in the other Party. Such recognition, which  may be achieved through harmonisation or otherwise, may be based upon an  
56 Relevant international organisations refers to international bodies whose membership is open to the  relevant bodies of both Parties to this Agreement.
30 
agreement or arrangement between the Parties or their relevant competent bodies, or  may be accorded autonomously. 
2. Nothing in Article 5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) shall be construed to  require the Party to accord such recognition to the education or experience obtained,  requirements met or licences or certifications granted in the territory of the other Party. 
3. A Party that is a party to an agreement or arrangement of the type referred to in  paragraph 1, whether existing or future, shall afford adequate opportunity for the other  Party to negotiate its accession to such an agreement or arrangement or to negotiate  comparable ones with it. Where a Party accords recognition autonomously, it shall  afford adequate opportunity for the other Party to demonstrate that education,  experience, licences or certifications obtained or requirements met in that other Party’s  territory should be recognised. 
4. A Party shall not accord recognition in a manner which would constitute a means  of discrimination between countries in the application of its standards or criteria for the  authorisation, licensing or certification of service suppliers, or a disguised restriction  on trade in services. 
Article 10 
Recognition Cooperation 
1. The Parties shall ensure that their relevant competent authorities commence  negotiations on areas for mutual recognition of the equivalence of each Party’s: 
(a) accounting work experience and qualifications; 
(b) auditing work experience and qualifications; and 
(c) accounting and auditing standards, 
as soon as possible. 
2. The Parties shall commence negotiations on a Mutual Recognition Arrangement  (“MRA”) for qualifications or experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or  certifications for architects following the entry into force of this Agreement, with a view  to reaching such an MRA as soon as possible, and exploring the possibilities for  expanding the MRA to other architectural and engineering areas.
31 
Article 11 
Joint Committee on Recognition Cooperation 
1. For the purposes of effective implementation of Article 10 (Recognition  Cooperation), a Joint Committee on Recognition Co-operation (the “Committee”),  including a working group on accounting and auditing, shall be established. The  functions of the Committee shall be:  
(a) reviewing and discussing the issues concerning the effective  implementation of Article 10 (Recognition Cooperation); 
(b) identifying and recommending areas for and ways of furthering cooperation  between the Parties; and 
(c) discussing other issues relating to the implementation of Article 10 (Recognition Cooperation). 
2. The Committee, including the working group on accounting and auditing, shall  meet on the request of either Party or the FTA Joint Committee established under  Article 111 (Implementation and Review) at a mutually acceptable time and venue. 
Article 12 
Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers 
1. Each Party shall ensure that any monopoly supplier of a service in its territory  does not, in the supply of the monopoly service in the relevant market, act in a manner  inconsistent with that Party's obligations under Article 3 (Market Access) and Article 4  (National Treatment).  
2. Where a Party's monopoly supplier competes, either directly or through an  affiliated company, in the supply of a service outside the scope of its monopoly rights  and which is subject to that Party's obligations, the Party shall ensure that such a  supplier does not abuse its monopoly position to act in its territory in a manner  inconsistent with such obligations.  
3. If a Party has reason to believe that a monopoly supplier of a service of the other  Party is acting in a manner inconsistent with paragraphs 1 or 2, it may request the 
32 
other Party establishing, maintaining or authorising such supplier to provide specific  information concerning the relevant operations.  
4. This Article shall also apply to cases of exclusive service suppliers, where a  Party, formally or in effect: 
(a) authorises or establishes a small number of service suppliers; and 
(b) substantially prevents competition among those suppliers in its territory. Article 13 
Business Practices 
1. The Parties recognise that certain business practices of service suppliers, other  than those falling under Article 12 (Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers), may  restrain competition and thereby restrict trade in services.  
2. A Party shall, at the request of the other Party, enter into consultations with a  view to eliminating practices referred to in paragraph 1. The requested Party shall  accord full and sympathetic consideration to such a request and shall cooperate  through the supply of publicly available non-confidential information of relevance to  the matter in question. The requested Party shall also provide other information  available to the requesting Party, subject to its domestic laws and to the conclusion of a satisfactory agreement concerning the safeguarding of its confidentiality by the  requesting Party. 
Article 14 
Safeguard Measures 
The Parties note the multilateral negotiations pursuant to Article X of the GATS on the  question of emergency safeguard measures based on the principle of non discrimination. Upon the conclusion of such multilateral negotiations, the Parties shall  conduct a review for the purpose of discussing appropriate amendments to this  Agreement so as to incorporate the results of such multilateral negotiations. 
Article 15 
Payments and Transfers
33 
1. Except under the circumstances envisaged in Article 107 (Restrictions to  Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments), a Party shall not apply restrictions on  international transfers and payments for current transactions relating to its  commitments. 
2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of the Parties as  members of the International Monetary Fund under the Articles of Agreement of the  International Monetary Fund (the “Articles of Agreement”), including the use of  exchange actions which are in conformity with the Articles of Agreement, provided that  a Party shall not impose restrictions on any capital transactions inconsistently with its  obligations regarding such transactions, except under Article 107 (Restrictions to  Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments) or at the request of the International Monetary  Fund. 
Article 16 
Transparency 
Article III of the GATS is incorporated, mutatis mutandis, into and shall form an integral  part of this Agreement. 
Article 17 
Disclosure of Confidential Information 
Nothing in this Chapter shall require any Party to provide confidential information, the  disclosure of which would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the  public interest, or which would prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular  enterprises, public or private. 
Article 18 
Denial of Benefits
34 
1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of the other  Party if the service supplier is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of a non Party, and the denying Party adopts or maintains measures with respect to the non Party or a person of the non-Party that prohibit transactions with the enterprise or that  would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to the  enterprise. 
2. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of the other  Party if the service supplier is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of a non Party or by persons of the denying Party that has no substantial business activities in  the territory of the other Party. 
Article 19 
Miscellaneous Provisions 
The following GATS Annexes shall be incorporated, mutatis mutandis, into and form  an integral part of this Agreement: 
(a) Annex on Movement of Natural Persons Supplying Services; (b) Annex on Air Transport Services; and 
(c) Annex on Financial Services.    


            CHAPTER 9  MOVEMENT OF NATURAL PERSONS


ARTICLE 77
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) business visitor means a natural person of either Party who is:

(i) a service seller being a natural person who is a sales representative of a service supplier of that Party and is seeking temporary entry into the territory of the other Party for the purpose of negotiating the sale of services for that service supplier, where such representative will not be engaged in making direct sales to the general public or in supplying services directly; or

(ii) (A) an investor of a Party, being a natural person of a Party who is making or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party; or

(B) a duly authorised representative of an investor of a Party  (including an enterprise of a Party that is making or has made an  investment in the territory of the other Party); or

(iii) a goods seller, being a natural person who is seeking temporary entry to the territory of the other Party to negotiate the sale of goods where such negotiations do not involve direct sales to the general public;

(b) contractual service supplier means a natural person of a Party who:

(i) is an employee of a service supplier or an enterprise of a Party, whether a company, partnership or firm, who enters the territory of the other Party temporarily in order to perform a service pursuant to a contract between his employer and a service consumer in the territory of the other Party;

(ii) is employed by a company, partnership or firm of the Party, which  is not established in the territory of the other Party where the  service is to be provided;

(iii) receives his or her remuneration from that employer; and

(iv) satisfies any other requirements under the domestic laws and regulations of the other Party to provide such services in the territory of that Party;

(c) executive means a natural person within an organisation who primarily directs the management of the organisation, exercises wide latitude in decision making, and receives only general supervision or direction from higher level executives, the board of directors or stockholders of the business. An executive would not directly perform tasks related to the actual provision of the service or the operation of an investment;

(d) immigration formality means a visa, permit, pass, or other document or electronic authority granting a natural person of one Party the right to enter, reside or work in the territory of the other Party;

(e) immigration measure means any law, regulation, policy or procedure affecting the entry and sojourn of foreign nationals;

(f) intra-corporate transferee means an executive, a manager, or a  specialist as defined respectively in paragraphs (c), (g) and (h),  who is an employee of a service supplier or investor of a Party  established in the territory of the other Party;

(g) manager means a natural person within an organisation who primarily directs the organisation or a department or sub-division of the organisation, supervises and controls the work of other supervisory, professional or managerial employees, has the authority to hire and fire or take other personnel actions (such as promotion or leave authorisation), and exercises discretionary authority over day-to-day operations. For greater clarity, this does not include employees who primarily perform tasks necessary for the provision of the service;

(h) specialist means a natural person within an organisation who possesses knowledge at an advanced level of technical expertise, and who possesses proprietary knowledge of the organisation's service, research equipment, techniques or management; and


(i) temporary entry means entry by a business visitor, an intra corporate transferee, or a contractual service supplier, as the case  may be, without the intent to establish permanent residence and  for the purpose of engaging in activities which are clearly related  to their respective business purposes. Additionally, in the case of  a business visitor, the salaries of and any related payments to  such a visitor should be paid entirely by the service supplier or  enterprise which employs that visitor in the visitor’s home country.


ARTICLE 78
Objectives

The objective of this Chapter, which reflects the preferential trading relationship between the Parties and their mutual desire  to facilitate temporary entry of natural persons, is to establish transparent criteria and streamlined procedures for temporary entry, while recognising the need to ensure border security and to protect the domestic labour force in the territories of the Parties.


ARTICLE 79
Scope

1. This Chapter applies to measures affecting the movement of natural persons of a Party into the territory of the other Party, where such persons are:

(a) business visitors;

(b) contractual services suppliers; or

(c) intra-corporate transferees.

2. Nothing in this Chapter, Chapter 8 (Cross-Border Trade in Services)  or Chapter 10 (Investment) shall apply to measures pertaining to  citizenship, nationality, residence or employment on a permanent basis. 
3. Nothing contained in this Chapter, Chapter 8 (Cross-Border Trade  in Services) or Chapter 10 (Investment) shall prevent a Party from  applying measures to regulate the entry or temporary stay of natural  persons of the other Party in its territory, including measures necessary  to protect the integrity of its territory and to ensure the orderly movement  of natural persons across its borders, provided such measures are not  applied in a manner so as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to the  other Party under this Agreement.15 
15 The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons of a Party and not for those of non-Parties  shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing trade in goods or services or conduct of investment  activities under this Agreement.

ARTICLE 80
Expeditious Application Procedures

Each Party shall process expeditiously applications for immigration formalities from natural persons of the other Party, including further immigration formality requests or extensions thereof, so as to avoid unduly impairing or delaying trade in goods or services or conduct of investment activities under this Agreement. Each Party shall notify applicants for temporary entry, either directly or through their authorised representative or their prospective employer of the outcome of their applications, including the period of stay and other conditions.


ARTICLE 81
General Principles for Grant of Temporary Entry

1. The Parties may make commitments in respect of temporary entry of natural persons, as defined in Article 59 (Definitions).

2. Such commitments and the conditions governing them shall be inscribed in Annex 6 (Commitments on Temporary Entry of Natural Persons).

3. Where a Party makes a commitment under paragraphs 1 and 2, that Party shall grant temporary entry to the extent provided for in that commitment, provided that such natural persons are otherwise qualified under all applicable immigration measures.

4. In respect of the commitments on temporary entry in Annex 6 (Commitments on Temporary Entry of Natural Persons), unless otherwise specified therein, neither Party may:

(a) require labour certification tests, or other procedures of similar effect;

(b) impose or maintain any numerical restriction relating to temporary entry; or

(c) require  labour  market  testing,  economic  needs  testing  or  other procedures of similar effects as a condition for temporary entry.




1 The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons of a Party and not for those of non-Parties shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing trade in goods or services or conduct of investment activities under this Agreement.

5. Each Party shall limit any fees for processing applications for temporary entry of natural persons to the approximate cost of services rendered.

6. The temporary entry granted by virtue of this Chapter does not replace the requirements needed to carry out a profession or activity according to the specific laws and regulations in force in the territory of the Party authorising the temporary entry.


ARTICLE 82
Transparency

Each Party shall, upon modifying or amending an immigration measure that affects the temporary entry of natural persons, ensure that such modifications or amendments are promptly published and made available through electronic means or otherwise, in such a manner as will enable natural persons of the other Party to become acquainted with them.


ARTICLE 83
Contact Points

Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communication and the effective implementation of this Chapter, and respond to inquiries from the other Party regarding regulations affecting the movement of natural persons between the Parties or on any matter covered by this Chapter, and shall provide details of this contact point to the other Party. The Parties shall notify each other promptly of any amendment to the details of their contact point. The contact point should identify and recommend areas for and ways of furthering co-operation in promoting increased movement of natural persons between the Parties.

CHAPTER 10  
INVESTMENT  
Section A：Investment  
ARTICLE 1  
Scope of Application  
1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to  investors of the other Party and covered investments.1 
2. A Party’s obligations under Section A (Investment) shall apply:  (a) to all levels of government or authorities of that Party; and  
(b) to any non-governmental body when it exercises any governmental  authority delegated to it by the government or authorities of that Party. 2  
3. This Chapter shall not apply to:  
(a) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, or to any conditions attached to the  receipt or continued receipt of such subsidies or grants, whether or not such  subsidies or grants are offered exclusively to domestic investors and  investments; and 
(b) matters of taxation in the territory of either Party, except as set out in Article  19 (Taxation). 
4. For greater certainty, this Chapter shall not bind a Party in relation to any act or  fact that took place or any situation that ceased to exist before the date of entry into  force of this Chapter.  

Article 2 
Relation to Other Chapters  
In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another  Chapter of this Agreement, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent  of the inconsistency.

Article 3 
National Treatment3  
1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment  no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own  investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion,  management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of  investments in its territory. 
2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less  favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments in  its territory of its own investors with respect to the establishment,  acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or  other disposition of investments. 
3 For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in “like circumstances” under Article 3  (National Treatment) or Article 4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) depends on the totality of the  circumstances, including whether the relevant treatment distinguishes between investors or  investments on the basis of legitimate public welfare objectives.

Article 4 
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment4 
1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment  no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors  of any non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition,  expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other  disposition of investments in its territory.
5 
2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less  favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments in  its territory of investors of any non-Party with respect to the establishment,  acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or  other disposition of investments. 
3. For greater certainty, the treatment referred to in this Article does  not encompass dispute resolution mechanisms or procedures, such as  those included in Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement), that are  provided for in international investment or trade agreements. 
4 For the purposes of this Article, the term “non-Party” shall not include the following WTO  Members within the meaning of the WTO Agreement: (1) Hong Kong, China; (2) Macao, China;  and (3) Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu (Chinese Taipei).

ARTICLE 5  
Minimum Standard of Treatment6 
1. Each Party shall accord to covered investments fair and equitable treatment  and full protection and security in accordance with customary international law.  
2. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 prescribes the customary international law  minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the minimum standard of treatment to be  afforded to covered investments. The concepts of “fair and equitable treatment” and  “full protection and security” do not require treatment and do not create substantive  rights in addition to or beyond that which is required by that standard. The obligation  in paragraph 1 to provide:  
(a) “fair and equitable treatment” includes the obligation not to deny justice in  criminal, civil, or administrative adjudicatory proceedings in accordance with  due process of law; and 
(b) “full protection and security” refers to the requirements on each Party to provide  the level of police protection required under customary international law.  
  
5 For greater certainty, “bilateral, regional or international agreements” includes any subsequent reviews  or amendments to those agreements.  
6 Article 5 (Minimum Standard of Treatment) shall be interpreted in accordance with Annex 10-A  (Customary International Law). 
37  
3. A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of this  Chapter, or of a separate international agreement, does not establish that there has  been a breach of this Article.  
4. For greater certainty, the mere fact that a Party takes or fails to take an action  that may be inconsistent with an investor’s expectations does not constitute a breach  of this Article, even if there is loss or damage to the covered investment as a result.  

Article 6 
Prohibition of Performance Requirements  
1. Neither Party shall, in connection with the establishment, acquisition,  expansion, management, conduct, operation, or sale or other disposition  of an investment of an investor of the other Party in its territory, impose  or enforce any requirement, or enforce any commitment or  undertaking:6bis
6 
(a) to export a given level or percentage of goods or services; (b) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content; 
(c) to purchase, use, or accord a preference to goods produced  in its territory, or to purchase goods from persons in its territory; 
(d) to relate the volume or value of imports to the volume or value  of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange inflows  associated with investments of that investor; 
(e) to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that such  investment produces or supplies by relating such sales to the  volume or value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings; 
(f) to transfer a particular technology, a production process, or  other proprietary knowledge to a person in its territory;  
(g) to supply exclusively from the territory of the Party the goods  that such investment produces or the services that such  investment supplies to a specific regional market or to the  world market; or 
(h) to adopt a given rate or amount of royalty under a licence  contract or a given duration of the term of a licence contract,  in regard to any licence contract in existence at the time the  requirement is imposed or enforced, or any commitment or  undertaking is enforced, or any future licence contract freely  entered into between the investor and a person in its territory,  provided that the requirement is imposed or the commitment  or undertaking is enforced in a manner that constitutes direct  interference with that licence contract by an exercise of non-judicial governmental authority of a Party.
6ter For greater  certainty, this sub-paragraph does not apply when the licence  contract is concluded between the investor and a Party. 
2. Neither Party shall condition the receipt or continued receipt of an  advantage, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion,  management, conduct, operation, or sale or other disposition of an  investment in its territory of an investor of the other Party on compliance  with any of the following requirements: 
(a) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content; 
(b) to purchase, use, or accord a preference to goods produced  in its territory, or to purchase goods from persons in its territory; 
(c) to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the  volume or value of exports or to the amount of foreign  exchange inflows associated with such investment; or 
(d) to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that such  investment produces or supplies by relating such sales to the  volume or value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings.  
3. (a) For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 1 shall be  construed to prevent a Party from, in connection with the  establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct,  operation or sale or other disposition of an investment of an  investor of the other Party in its territory, imposing or enforcing  a requirement or enforcing a commitment or undertaking to  employ or train workers in its territory, provided that such  employment or training does not require the transfer of a  particular technology, production process, or other proprietary  knowledge to a person in its territory.
8 
(b) Nothing in paragraph 2 shall be construed to prevent a Party  from conditioning the receipt or continued receipt of an  advantage, in connection with an investment in its territory of  an investor of the other Party, on compliance with a  requirement to locate production, supply a service, train or  employ workers, construct or expand particular facilities, or  carry out research and development, in its territory.  
(c) Paragraphs 1(f) and 1(h) shall not apply: 
(i) if a Party authorises use of an intellectual property right in  accordance with Article 31 or Article 31bis of the  Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual  Property Rights in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement  (hereinafter referred to as the “TRIPS Agreement”),or to measures requiring the disclosure of proprietary  information that fall within the scope of, and are  consistent with, Article 39 of the TRIPS Agreement; or 
(ii) if the requirement is imposed or the commitment or  undertaking is enforced by a court, administrative tribunal,  or competition authority to remedy a practice determined  after judicial or administrative process to be anti competitive under the Party’s competition laws and  regulations. 6quinquies 
(d) Paragraph 1(h) shall not apply if the requirement is imposed  or the commitment or undertaking is enforced by a tribunal or  competent authority as equitable remuneration under the  Party’s copyright laws and regulations. 
(e) Paragraphs 1(a) to 1(c), 2(a), and 2(b) shall not apply to  qualification requirements for goods or services with respect  to export promotion and foreign aid programs.
9 
(f) Paragraphs 2(a) and 2(b) shall not apply to requirements  imposed by an importing Party relating to the content of goods  necessary to qualify for preferential tariffs or preferential  quotas. 
(g) Paragraph 1(h) shall not be construed to prevent a Party from  adopting or maintaining measures to protect legitimate public  welfare objectives, provided that such measures are not  applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner, or in a manner  that constitutes a disguised restriction on international trade or  investment. 
4. For greater certainty, paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to any commitment or undertaking, or requirement other than those set out in  those paragraphs. 
5. This Article does not preclude enforcement of any commitment,  undertaking, or requirement between private parties, where a Party did  not impose or require the commitment, undertaking, or requirement. 
6bis For greater certainty, a condition for the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage referred  to in paragraph 2 does not constitute a “requirement” or a “commitment or undertaking” for the  purposes of paragraph 1. 
6ter For the purposes of sub-paragraph (h), a “licence contract” means any contract concerning the  licensing of technology, a production process, or other proprietary knowledge. 
6quater This includes any amendment to the TRIPS Agreement implementing paragraph 6 of the  Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2) adopted at  Doha on 14 November 2001. 
6quinquies The Parties note that a patent does not necessarily confer market power. 
Article 6bis 
Senior Management and Board of Directors 
1. Neither Party shall require that an enterprise of that Party that is a  covered investment appoint to a senior management position a natural  person of any particular nationality.
10 
2. A Party may require that a majority of the board of directors, or any  committee thereof, of an enterprise of that Party that is a covered  investment, be of a particular nationality, or resident in the territory of the  Party, provided that the requirement does not materially impair the ability  of the investor to exercise control over its investment. 
Article 6ter 
Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures  
1. Articles 3 (National Treatment), 4 (Most-Favoured-Nation  Treatment), 6 (Prohibition of Performance Requirements) and 6bis (Senior Management and Board of Directors) shall not apply to: 
(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a  Party at: 
(i) the central level of government, as set out by that Party in  List I of its Schedule in Annex 5 (Schedules of  Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures); 
(ii) a regional level of government, as set out by that  Party in List I of its Schedule in Annex 5 (Schedules of  Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures); or 
(iii) a local level of government; 
(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming  measure referred to in sub-paragraph (a); and 
(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in  sub-paragraph (a) to the extent that the amendment does not  decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed 
11 
immediately before the amendment, with Articles 3 (National  Treatment), 4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), 6 (Prohibition of Performance Requirements) and 6bis (Senior  Management and Board of Directors). 
2. Articles 3 (National Treatment), 4 (Most-Favoured-Nation  Treatment), 6 (Prohibition of Performance Requirements) and 6bis (Senior Management and Board of Directors) shall not apply to any  measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors,  subsectors, or activities, as set out in List II of its Schedule in Annex 5  (Schedules of Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures). 
3. Neither Party shall, under any measure adopted after the date of  entry into force of the 2023 Protocol and covered by List II of its Schedule  in Annex 5 (Schedules of Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures),  require an investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell  or otherwise dispose of an investment that exists at the time the measure  becomes effective, unless otherwise specified in the initial approval by  the relevant authorities. 
4. Articles 3 (National Treatment) and 4 (Most-Favoured-Nation  Treatment) shall not apply to any measure that falls within Article 5 of the  TRIPS Agreement and any measure that is covered by an exception to,  or derogation from, the obligations imposed by Articles 3 or 4 of the  TRIPS Agreement. 
5. Articles 3 (National Treatment), 4 (Most-Favoured-Nation  Treatment), 6 (Prohibition of Performance Requirements) and 6bis (Senior Management and Board of Directors) do not apply to government  procurement. 
6. The Parties will endeavour to progressively remove the non conforming measures.
12 
6sexies The Parties understand that for China, the regional level of government means the provincial  level of government.

ARTICLE 7  
Expropriation and Compensation7 
1. No Party may expropriate or nationalise a covered investment either directly or  
  
7 Article 7 (Expropriation and Compensation) shall be interpreted in accordance with Annexes 10-A  (Customary International Law) and 10-B (Expropriation). 
38  
indirectly through measures equivalent to expropriation or nationalisation  (“expropriation”), except:  
(a) for a public purpose; 
(b) in a non-discriminatory manner; 
(c) on payment of compensation in accordance with this Article; and 
(d) in accordance with applicable legal procedure of that Party and due  process of law.  
2. The compensation referred to in paragraph 1(c) shall:  
(a) be paid without delay; 
(b) be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment  immediately before the expropriation took place (“the date of expropriation”); 
(c) not reflect any change in value occurring because the intended  expropriation had become known earlier; and 
(d) be fully realisable and freely transferable.  
  
3. If the fair market value is denominated in a freely usable currency, the  compensation referred to in paragraph 1(c) shall be no less than the fair market value  on the date of expropriation, plus interest at a commercially reasonable rate for that  currency, accrued from the date of expropriation until the date of payment.  
4. If the fair market value is denominated in a currency that is not freely usable,  the compensation referred to in paragraph 1(c), converted into the currency of  payment at the market rate of exchange prevailing on the date of payment, shall be  no less than:  
(a) the fair market value on the date of expropriation, converted into a freely  usable currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing on that date, plus  
(b) interest at a commercially reasonable rate, for that freely usable currency,  accrued from the date of expropriation until the date of payment.  
5. This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licences granted in  relation to intellectual property rights in accordance with the TRIPS Agreement, or to  the revocation, limitation or creation of intellectual property rights, to the extent that  such issuance, revocation, limitation or creation is consistent with the TRIPS  Agreement.  
6. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, any measure of expropriation by a Party  relating to land, which shall be as defined in its applicable domestic legislation, shall  be for a purpose and upon payment of compensation at market value in accordance  with the aforesaid legislation. 
39  
ARTICLE 8  
Compensation for Losses  
1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party, and to covered  investments, non-discriminatory treatment with respect to measures it adopts or  maintains relating to losses suffered by investments in its territory owing to armed  conflict or civil strife.  
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if an investor of a Party, in the situations referred  to in paragraph 1, suffers a loss in the territory of the other Party resulting from:  
(a) requisitioning of its covered investment or part thereof by the latter’s  forces or authorities; or 
(b) destruction of its covered investment or part thereof by the latter’s forces  or authorities, which was not required by the necessity of the situation,  
the latter Party shall provide the investor restitution, compensation, or both, as  appropriate, for such loss.  
ARTICLE 9  
Transfers  
1. Each Party shall permit all transfers relating to a covered investment to be made  freely and without delay into and out of its territory.8 Such transfers include:  
(a) contributions to capital;9 
(b) profits, dividends, capital gains, and proceeds from the sale of all or any  part of the covered investment or from the partial or complete liquidation of the  covered investment; 
(c) interest, royalty payments, management fees, and technical assistance  and other fees; 
(d) payments made under a contract, including a loan agreement; 
(e) payments made pursuant to Article 7 (Expropriation and Compensation)  and Article 8 (Compensation for Losses); 
(f) payments arising out of a dispute; and 
(g) net earnings and remuneration of a natural person of the other Party who  
  
8 For greater certainty, the transfers referred to in this Article shall comply with relevant formalities stipulated  by the laws and regulations, if any, of a Party relating to exchange administration.  9 For greater certainty, contributions to capital include the initial contribution. 
40  
is employed and allowed to work in connection with a covered investment in its  territory.  
2. Each Party shall permit transfers relating to a covered investment to be made  in a freely usable currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing at the time of  transfer.  
3. Each Party shall permit returns in kind relating to a covered investment to be  made as authorised or specified in a written agreement between the Party and a  covered investment or an investor of the other Party.  
4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 through 3, a Party may prevent a transfer  through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith application of its laws and  regulations relating to:  
(a) bankruptcy, insolvency or the protection of the rights of creditors; (b) issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options or derivatives; (c) criminal or administrative violations; 
(d) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to  assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;  
(e) ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or  administrative proceedings; or 
(f) social security, public retirement or compulsory savings schemes.  
5. For greater certainty, the transfers referred to in this Article shall comply with  relevant formalities stipulated by the laws and regulations, if any, of a Party relating to  exchange administration, insofar as such laws and regulations are not to be used as  a means of avoiding a Party’s obligations under this Chapter.  
6. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the members of  the International Monetary Fund under the Articles of Agreement of the International  Monetary Fund, including the use of exchange actions which are in conformity with the  Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, provided that a Party shall  not impose restrictions on any capital transactions inconsistently with its obligations  under this Chapter regarding such transactions, except under Article 10 (Measures to  Safeguard the Balance of Payments) or at the request of the International Monetary  Fund.  
ARTICLE 10  
Measures to Safeguard the Balance of Payments  
1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or  maintaining restrictions on payments or transfers relating to capital movements: 
41  
(a) in the event of serious balance of payments or external financial  difficulties or threats thereof; or  
(b) where, in exceptional circumstances, payments or transfers relating to  capital movements cause or threaten to cause serious difficulties for  macroeconomic management, in particular, monetary and exchange rate  policies.  
2. The restrictions referred to in paragraph 1 shall:  
(a) not exceed a period of eighteen (18) months; however, if extremely  exceptional circumstances arise such that a Party seeks to extend such  restrictions, the Party will coordinate in advance with the other Party concerning  the implementation of any proposed extension;  
(b) be consistent with the Articles of the Agreement of the International  Monetary Fund;  
(c) not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances described in  paragraph 1;  
(d) avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and financial  interests of the Parties;  
(e) be temporary and phased out progressively as the situation described in  paragraph 1 improves;  
(f) promptly be notified to the other Party; and  
(g) be applied on a non-discriminatory basis such that the other Party is  treated no less favourably than any non-Party.  
ARTICLE 11  
Subrogation  
1. If a Party, or any agency, institution, statutory body or corporation designated  by the Party (“designated agency”), makes a payment to an investor of the Party under  a guarantee, a contract of insurance or other form of indemnity that it has entered into  with respect to a covered investment, the other Party, in whose territory the covered  investment was made, shall recognise the subrogation or transfer of any rights the  investor would have possessed under this Chapter, including any rights under Section  B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement), with respect to the covered investment but for  the subrogation, and the investor shall be precluded from pursuing such rights to the  extent of the subrogation. The subrogated or transferred right or claim shall not be  greater than the original right or claim of the investor. 
2. Where a Party or designated agency of a Party has made a payment to an  investor of that Party and has taken over rights and claims of the investor, that investor  shall not, unless authorised to act on behalf of the Party or the designated agency of 
42  
the Party making the payment, pursue those rights and claims against the other Party. 
ARTICLE 12  
Denial of Benefits10 
1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of the other Party  that is an enterprise of that other Party and to investments of that investor, if a non Party or persons of a non-Party own or control the enterprise and the denying Party:  
(a) does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non-Party; or 
(b) adopts or maintains measures with respect to the non-Party or a person  of the non-Party that prohibit transactions with the enterprise or that would be  violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to the  enterprise or to its investments.  
2. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of the other Party  that is an enterprise of the other Party and to investments of that investor, if the  enterprise has no substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party and  a non-Party, or persons of a non-Party or the denying Party, own or control the  enterprise.  
ARTICLE 13  
Transparency  
1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and  administrative rulings of general application with respect to any matter covered by this  Chapter are promptly published or otherwise made publicly available in such a manner  as to enable interested persons or the other Party to become acquainted with them.  Each Party shall endeavour to publish international investment treaties in force,  pertaining to or affecting investors or investment activities.  
2. For purposes of this Article, “administrative ruling of general application” means  an administrative ruling or interpretation that applies to all persons and fact situations  that fall generally within its ambit and that establishes a norm of conduct but does not  include:  
(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or quasi-judicial  proceeding that applies to a particular covered investment or investor of the  other Party in a specific case; or  
(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or practice.  3. To the extent possible, each Party should:  
  
10 For greater certainty, a Party may deny benefits of this Chapter under this Article, including access  to dispute settlement under Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement), at any appropriate time. 
43  
(a) publish in advance any measure referred to in paragraph 1 that it  proposes to adopt; and 
(b) provide interested persons and the other Party a reasonable opportunity  to comment on such proposed measures.  
ARTICLE 14  
General Exceptions  
Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which  would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against the other  Party or its investors where like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on  investments of investors of the other Party in the territory of a Party, nothing in this  Chapter shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by a Party of  measures:  
  
(a) necessary to protect public morals or to maintain public order11; (b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health; 
(c) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not  inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter including those relating to:  
(i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with  the effects of a default on a contract; 
(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the  processing and dissemination of personal data and the protection of  confidentiality of individual records and accounts; 
(iii) safety; 
(d) imposed for the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or  archaeological value; or 
(e) relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such  measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic  production or consumption.  
ARTICLE 15  
Security Exceptions  
  
11 The public order exception may be invoked only where a genuine and sufficiently serious threat is  posed to one of the fundamental interests of society. 
44  
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed:  
(a) to require a Party to furnish or allow access to any information, the  disclosure of which it determines to be contrary to its essential security interests;  or  
(b) to preclude a Party from applying measures that it considers necessary  for the fulfilment of its obligations with respect to the maintenance or restoration  of international peace or security, or the protection of its own essential security  interests.  
ARTICLE 16  
Special Formalities and Information Requirements  
1. Nothing in Article 3 (National Treatment) shall be construed to prevent a Party  from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities in  connection with covered investments, provided that such formalities do not materially  impair the protections afforded by a Party to investors of the other Party and covered  investments pursuant to this Chapter.  
2. Notwithstanding Articles 3 (National Treatment) and 4 (Most-Favoured-Nation  Treatment), a Party may require an investor of the other Party or its covered  investment to provide information concerning that investment solely for informational  or statistical purposes. The Party shall protect such confidential information from any  disclosure that would prejudice the competitive position of the investor or the covered  investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prevent a Party from  otherwise obtaining or disclosing information in connection with the equitable and good  faith application of its law.  
ARTICLE 17  
Protection of Confidential Information  
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party to furnish or allow access  to confidential information, the disclosure of which it considers would be contrary to its  law, or which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public  interest, or which would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular  enterprises, public or private.  
ARTICLE 18  
Prudential Measures  
1. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a Party shall not be  prevented from adopting or maintaining measures for prudential reasons, including for  the protection of investors, depositors, policy holders, or persons to whom a fiduciary  duty is owed by a financial services supplier, or to ensure the integrity and stability of 
45  
the financial system.12 If these measures do not conform with the provisions of this  Chapter to which this exception applies, they shall not be used as a means of avoiding  the Party’s commitments or obligations under those provisions. 
2. Nothing in this Chapter applies to non-discriminatory measures of general  application taken by any public entity, as defined in sub-paragraph 5(c) of the Annex  on Financial Services of the GATS, in pursuit of monetary and related credit policies  or exchange rate policies. This paragraph shall not affect a Party’s obligations under  Article 9 (Transfers).  
3. Where a claimant submits a claim to arbitration under Section B (Investor-State  Dispute Settlement) and the respondent invokes paragraphs 1 or 2 as a defence, the  following provisions shall apply:  
(a) The respondent shall, either within one hundred and twenty (120) days  of the date the claim is submitted to arbitration under Section B (Investor-State  Dispute Settlement) or no later than a date the tribunal constituted under  Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) fixes, submit in writing to the  competent financial authorities of the non-disputing Party a request for a joint  determination by the competent financial authorities of both Parties on the issue  of whether and to what extent paragraphs 1 or 2 is a valid defence to the claim.  The respondent shall promptly provide the tribunal, if constituted, a copy of the  request.  
(b) The competent financial authorities of both Parties shall attempt in good  faith to make a joint determination as described in sub-paragraph (a). Any such  determination shall be transmitted promptly to the disputing parties and, if  constituted, the tribunal under Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement).  The determination shall be binding on the tribunal constituted under Section B  (Investor-State Dispute Settlement).  
(c) If the competent financial authorities of both Parties referred to in sub paragraphs (a) and (b) have not made a joint determination within one hundred  and twenty (120) days of the date of receipt of the respondent’s written request  for a joint determination under sub-paragraph (a), the respondent or the non disputing Party may submit its claim to arbitration in accordance with Chapter  12 (Dispute Settlement) for a tribunal constituted under Chapter 12 (Dispute  Settlement) to consider whether and to what extent paragraphs 1 or 2 is a valid  defence to the claim. The final report of a tribunal constituted under Chapter 12  (Dispute Settlement) shall be binding on the tribunal constituted under Section  B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement), and any decision or award issued by the  tribunal constituted under Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) must  be consistent with the final report. The tribunal constituted under Chapter 12  (Dispute Settlement) shall transmit its final report to both Parties and to the  tribunal constituted under Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement).  
  
12 It is understood that the term “prudential reasons” also includes the maintenance of the safety,  soundness, integrity, or financial responsibility of individual financial institutions, as well as the  maintenance of the safety and financial and operational integrity of payment and clearing systems.
46  
(d) If the respondent or the non-disputing Party has not submitted its claim  to arbitration in accordance with Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement) within thirty  (30) days after the expiration of the one hundred and twenty (120) days period  referred to in sub-paragraph (c), the tribunal constituted under Section B  (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) may proceed with respect to the claim.  
(i) The tribunal constituted under Section B (Investor-State Dispute  Settlement) shall draw no inference regarding the application of  paragraphs 1 and 2 from the fact that the competent financial authorities  have not made a determination as described in paragraphs 3(a), (b) and  (c).  
(ii) The non-disputing Party may make oral and written submissions  to the tribunal constituted under Section B (Investor-State Dispute  Settlement) regarding the issue of whether and to what extent  paragraphs 1 or 2 is a valid defence to the claim. Unless it makes such  a submission, the non-disputing Party shall be presumed, for the  purposes of the arbitration, to take a position on paragraphs 1 and 2 that  it is not inconsistent with that of the respondent.  
4. The expertise or experience of any candidate with respect to financial services  law or practice shall be taken into account in the appointment of arbitrators to the  tribunals as referred to in paragraph 3.  
ARTICLE 19  
Taxation  
1. Article 7 (Expropriation and Compensation) shall apply to taxation measures. An investor seeking to invoke Article 7 (Expropriation and Compensation) with respect  to a taxation measure, may only submit its claim to arbitration under Section B  (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) if: 
(a) the claimant has first referred in writing to the competent taxation  authorities of both Parties, at the time that it delivers its request of consultation  under Article 25 (Consultations), the issue of whether that taxation measure  involves an expropriation; and 
(b) within one hundred and eighty (180) days after the date of such referral,  the competent taxation authorities of both Parties do not agree to consider the  issue, or having agreed to consider it, fail to agree that the taxation measure is  not an expropriation.  
2. For the purposes of this Article, “competent taxation authorities” means:  
(a) in the case of the People’s Republic of China, the Ministry of Finance  and State Administration of Taxation or an authorised representative of the  Ministry of Finance and State Administration of Taxation; and  
(b) in the case of the Republic of Singapore, the Ministry of Finance;
47  
or their successors.  
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of a Party under  any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and any  such convention, that convention shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. In the  case of a tax convention between the Parties, the competent authorities under that  convention shall have sole responsibility for determining whether any inconsistency  exists between this Chapter and that convention.  
ARTICLE 20  
Promotion of Investment  
The Parties shall cooperate in promoting and increasing awareness through, amongst  others:  
(a) increasing investments between the Parties; 
(b) organising investment promotion activities; 
(c) promoting business matching events; 
(d) organising and supporting the organisation of various briefings and  seminars on investment opportunities and on investment laws, regulations and  policies; and 
(e) conducting information exchanges on other issues of mutual concern  relating to investment promotion and facilitation.  

Article 21 
Facilitation of Investment  
1. Subject to their laws and regulations, the Parties shall cooperate to  facilitate investment between the Parties through, amongst others: 
(a) creating the necessary environment for all forms of investment; 
(b) simplifying procedures for investment applications and  approvals; 
(c) promoting business matching events; 
(d) promoting dissemination of investment information, including  investment laws, regulations, policies and procedures; and 
(e) establishing or maintaining either contact points, one-stop  investment centres or similar mechanisms in the respective  host Parties to provide assistance and advisory services to the  business sectors including facilitation of operating licences  and permits.
13 
2. Subject to its laws and regulations, a Party’s activities under  Paragraph 1(e) may include, to the extent possible, assisting investors of  the other Party and covered investments to amicably resolve complaints  or grievances with government bodies which have arisen during their  investment activities by, among other things: 
(a) receiving and, where appropriate, considering referring or  giving due consideration to complaints raised by investors of  the other Party relating to government activities impacting their  covered investments; and 
(b) providing assistance, to the extent possible, in resolving  difficulties experienced by the investors of the other Party in  relation to their covered investments. 
3. Nothing in this Article shall be subject to, or otherwise affect, any  dispute resolution proceedings under this Chapter.
 
ARTICLE 23  
Transition Arrangement  
1. Upon entry into force of this Chapter, the Agreement Between the Government  of the People’s Republic of China and the Government of the Republic of Singapore  on the Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed on 21 November 1985, shall  terminate.13 
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a claim may be submitted pursuant to relevant  provisions of the Agreement Between the Government of the People’s Republic of  China and the Government of the Republic of Singapore on the Promotion and  Protection of Investments, regarding any act or fact that took place or any situation  that existed while the said Agreement was in force, and provided that no more than  three (3) years have elapsed since the date of the entry into force of this Chapter. 
  
13 For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph 3 of Article 16 of the Agreement Between the Government of  the People’s Republic of China and the Government of the Republic of Singapore on the Promotion and  Protection of Investments, shall not be applicable upon entry into force of this Chapter. 
49  

Section B：Investor-State Dispute Settlement  

Article 24 
Scope  
1. This Section shall apply to disputes between a Party and an  investor of the other Party concerning an alleged breach of an obligation  of the former under Article 3 (National Treatment), Article 4 (Most Favoured-Nation Treatment), Article 5 (Minimum Standard of Treatment),  Article 7 (Expropriation and Compensation), Article 8 (Compensation for  Losses), and Article 9 (Transfers), which causes loss or damage to the  investor or its investment with respect to the management, conduct,  operation or sale or other disposition of such investment. 
2. This Section shall not apply to any dispute concerning any measure  adopted or maintained or any treatment accorded to investors or  investments by a Party in respect of tobacco or tobacco-related  products14. 
14 For the purpose of this Chapter, “tobacco or tobacco-related products” means products under  Harmonised System Chapter 24 (Tobacco and Manufactured Tobacco Substitutes) and tobacco related products falling outside Harmonised System Chapter 24 (Tobacco and Manufactured  Tobacco Substitutes) of the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System of the World  Customs Organisation.

ARTICLE 25  
Consultations  
1. In the event of an investment dispute, if the claimant intends to submit the  dispute to arbitration, the claimant shall first deliver to the respondent a written  request for consultation.15 The request shall:  
(a) specify the name and address of the claimant and, where a claim is  submitted on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is a juridical person  which the claimant owns or controls directly or indirectly, specify the name,  address, and place of incorporation of the enterprise; 
(b) for each claim, identify the provision of this Chapter alleged to have  been breached and any other relevant provisions;  
(c) for each claim, identify the measures or events giving rise to the claim; 
(d) for each claim, indicate whether the claim is made by the claimant on  its own behalf or on behalf of the enterprise; 
(e) for each claim, provide a brief summary of the legal and factual basis  sufficient to present the problem clearly; and 
  
14 For the purpose of this Chapter, “tobacco or tobacco-related products” means products under  Chapter 24 (Tobacco and Manufactured Tobacco Substitutes) and tobacco-related products falling  outside Chapter 24 (Tobacco and Manufactured Tobacco Substitutes) of the Harmonised Commodity  Description and Coding System of the World Customs Organisation.  
15 For greater certainty, the request for consultation shall be sent to the government body listed in Annex  10-C (Service of Documents on a Party). 
50  
(f) specify the relief sought, the approximate amount of damages claimed  and its standard or basis for calculation.  
2. After a request for consultations is made pursuant to this Section, the claimant  and the respondent shall initially seek to resolve the dispute through consultations. 
3. If the disputing parties reach a mutually agreed solution to a dispute or certain  claims thereof formally raised under this Section, they shall abide by and comply with  the mutually agreed solution reached under this Article without delay. 
ARTICLE 26  
Submission of a Claim to Arbitration  
1. In the event that an investment dispute cannot be settled by consultations under  Article 25 (Consultations) within one hundred and eighty (180) days after the date of  receipt of the request for consultations,  
(a) the claimant, on its own behalf, may submit to arbitration under this  Section a claim:  
(i) that the respondent has breached an obligation under Article 3  (National Treatment), Article 4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment),  Article 5 (Minimum Standard of Treatment), Article 7 (Expropriation and  Compensation), Article 8 (Compensation for Losses) and Article 9  (Transfers); and 
(ii) that the claimant has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or  arising out of, that breach; or 
(b) the claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is a  juridical person which the claimant owns or controls directly or indirectly, may  submit to arbitration under this Section a claim:  
(i) that the respondent has breached an obligation under Article 3  (National Treatment), Article 4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment),  Article 5 (Minimum Standard of Treatment), Article 7 (Expropriation and  Compensation), Article 8 (Compensation for Losses) and Article 9  (Transfers); and 
(ii) that the enterprise has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or  arising out of, that breach.  
2. (a) A claimant may not initiate or continue a claim under this Section, if  another claim involving the same measure or measures alleged to constitute a breach  under Article 24 (Scope) and arising from the same events or circumstances is initiated  or continued pursuant to an agreement between the respondent and a non-Party by:  
(i) a person of a non-Party that owns or controls, directly or indirectly,  the claimant; or
51  
(ii) a person of a non-Party that is owned or controlled, directly or  indirectly, by the claimant.  
(b) Notwithstanding paragraph 2(a), the claim may proceed if the  respondent agrees that the claim may proceed, or if the claimant and the person  of a non-Party agree to consolidate the claims under the respective agreements  before a tribunal constituted under this Section.  
3. A claimant may submit a claim referred to in paragraph 1:  
(a) under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules of Procedure for  Arbitration Proceedings, provided that both the respondent and the non disputing Party are parties to the ICSID Convention; 
(b) under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that either the  respondent or the non-disputing Party is a party to the ICSID Convention; 
(c) under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules;16 
(d) if the claimant and respondent agree, to any other arbitration institution  or under any other arbitration rules.  
4. A claim shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under this Section when the  claimant’s notice of or request for arbitration (“notice of arbitration”):  
(a) referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention is  received by the Secretary-General; 
(b) referred to in Article 2 of Schedule C of the ICSID Additional Facility  Rules is received by the Secretary-General; 
(c) referred to in Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, together with  the statement of claim referred to in Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration  Rules, are received by the respondent; or 
(d) referred to under any arbitral institution or arbitral rules selected under  paragraph 3(d) is received by the respondent.  
A claim asserted by the claimant for the first time after such notice of arbitration is  submitted shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under this Section on the date of  its receipt under the applicable arbitration rules.  
  
16 “UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules” means the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on  International Trade Law, as adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 15 December 1976,  as revised in 2010. For greater certainty, the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency in Treaty-Based  Investor-State Arbitration shall not be applicable. 
52  
5. The arbitration rules applicable under paragraph 3 that are in effect on the date  the claim or claims were submitted to arbitration under this Section shall govern the  arbitration except to the extent modified by this Chapter.  
6. A notice of arbitration shall:  
(a) specify the name and address of the claimant and, where a claim is  submitted on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is a juridical person  which the claimant owns or controls directly or indirectly, specify the name,  address, and place of incorporation of the enterprise; 
(b) for each claim, identify the provision of this Chapter alleged to have been  breached and any other relevant provisions; 
(c) for each claim, identify the measure or event giving rise to the claim; 
(d) for each claim, indicate whether the claim is made by the claimant on its  own behalf or on behalf of the enterprise; 
(e) for each claim, provide the legal and factual basis sufficient to present  the problem clearly; and 
(f) specify the relief sought, the approximate amount of damages claimed  and its standard or basis for calculation.  
7. The claimant shall provide with the notice of arbitration:  
(a) the name of the arbitrator that the claimant appoints; or 
(b) the claimant’s written consent for the Secretary-General to appoint that  arbitrator.  
ARTICLE 27  
Consent of Each Party to Arbitration  
1. Each Party consents to the submission of a claim to arbitration under this  Section, provided that the claim is submitted in accordance with the provisions of this  Chapter. Failure to meet any of the conditions and limitations provided for in Article  28 (Conditions and Limitations on Consent of Each Party) shall nullify that consent.  
2. The consent under paragraph 1 and the submission of a claim to arbitration  under this Section shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of:  
(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and the  ICSID Additional Facility Rules for written consent of the parties to the dispute; and  
(b) Article II of the New York Convention for an “agreement in writing”. 
53  
ARTICLE 28  
Conditions and Limitations on Consent of Each Party  
1. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section if more than three  (3) years have elapsed from the date on which the claimant first acquired, or should  have first acquired, knowledge of the breach alleged under paragraph 1 of Article 26  (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) and knowledge that the claimant (for claims  brought under paragraph 1(a) of Article 26 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) or  the enterprise (for claims brought under paragraph 1(b) of Article 26 (Submission of  a Claim to Arbitration)) has incurred loss or damage. 
2. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section unless:  
(a) the claimant has complied with the rules and procedures set forth in  Article 25 (Consultations) and 26 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration); 
(b) the claim has been included in the request for consultations submitted  by the claimant in accordance with Article 25 (Consultations); 
(c) the claimant consents in writing to arbitration in accordance with the  procedures set out in this Chapter, and,  
(d) the notice of arbitration is accompanied,  
(i) for claims submitted to arbitration under paragraph 1(a) of Article  26 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), by the claimant’s written  waiver, and  
(ii) for claims submitted to arbitration under paragraph 1(b) of Article  26 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), by the claimant’s and the  enterprise’s written waivers,  
of any right to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under the  law of either Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any proceeding with  respect to any measure or event alleged to constitute a breach referred to in Article  26 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration).  
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2(d), the claimant (for claims brought under  paragraph 1(a) of Article 26 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), and the claimant  or the enterprise (for claims brought under paragraph 1(b) of Article 26 (Submission  of a Claim to Arbitration)) may initiate or continue an action before a judicial or  administrative tribunal of the respondent, which seeks interim injunctive relief and  does not involve the payment of monetary damages, provided that the action is  brought for the sole purpose of preserving the claimant’s or the enterprise’s rights  and interests during the pendency of the arbitration. 
ARTICLE 29  
Constitution of the Tribunal 
54  
1. Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the tribunal shall comprise three  (3) arbitrators, one (1) arbitrator appointed by each of the disputing parties and the  third, who shall be the presiding arbitrator, appointed by agreement of the disputing  parties.  
2. The Secretary-General shall serve as appointing authority for an arbitration  under this Section.  
3. If a tribunal has not been constituted within ninety (90) days after the date on  which a claim is submitted to arbitration under this Section, the appointing authority,  on the request of a disputing party, shall appoint, in his or her discretion, the arbitrator  or arbitrators not yet appointed.  
4. Unless both disputing parties agree, the appointing authority shall not appoint  a presiding arbitrator who is a national of either Party. 
5. All arbitrators appointed pursuant to this Section shall have expertise or  experience in public international law, international trade law or international  investment rules. They shall be independent of, and not be affiliated with or take  instructions from any organisation or the government of either Party.  
6. For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Schedule  C to the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to an objection to an  arbitrator on a ground other than nationality:  
(a) the respondent agrees to the appointment of each individual member  of a tribunal established under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional  Facility Rules; 
(b) a claimant referred to in paragraph 1(a) of Article 26 (Submission of a  Claim to Arbitration) may submit a claim to arbitration under this Section, or  continue a claim, under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility  Rules, only on condition that the claimant agrees in writing to the appointment  of each individual member of the tribunal; and 
(c) a claimant referred to in paragraph 1(b) of Article 26 (Submission of a  Claim to Arbitration) may submit a claim to arbitration under this Section, or  continue a claim, under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility  Rules, only on condition that the claimant and the enterprise agree in writing  to the appointment of each individual member of the tribunal.  
ARTICLE 30  
Conduct of the Arbitration  
1. The disputing parties may agree on the legal place of any arbitration under the  arbitral rules applicable under paragraph 3 of Article 26 (Submission of a Claim to  Arbitration). If the disputing parties fail to reach agreement, the tribunal shall  determine the place in accordance with the applicable arbitral rules, provided that the  place shall be in the territory of a State that is a party to the New York Convention. 
55  
2. The non-disputing Party may make oral and written submissions to the tribunal  regarding the interpretation of this Agreement.  
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, without written consent of the disputing parties,  the tribunal shall have no authority to accept and consider amicus curiae submissions  from a person or entity that is not a disputing party.  
4. Without prejudice to a tribunal’s authority to address other objections as a  preliminary question, such as an objection that a dispute is not within the competence  of the tribunal, including an objection to the tribunal’s jurisdiction, a tribunal shall  address and decide as a preliminary question any objection by the respondent that,  as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award in favour of  the claimant may be made under Article 35 (Awards).  
(a) Such objection shall be submitted to the tribunal as soon as possible  after the tribunal is constituted, and in no event later than the date the tribunal  fixes for the respondent to submit its counter-memorial or, in the case of an  amendment to the notice of arbitration, the date the tribunal fixes for the  respondent to submit its response to the amendment.  
(b) On receipt of an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall  suspend any proceedings on the merits, establish a schedule for considering  the objection consistent with any schedule it has established for considering  any other preliminary question, and issue a decision or award on the objection,  stating the grounds therefor.  
(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall assume  to be true, the claimant’s factual allegations in support of any claim in the  notice of arbitration and, in disputes brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration  Rules, the statement of claim referred to in Article 20 of the UNCITRAL  Arbitration Rules. The tribunal may also consider any relevant facts not in  dispute.  
(d) The respondent does not waive any objection as to competence,  including any objection to jurisdiction, or any argument on the merits merely  because the respondent did or did not raise an objection under this paragraph  or make use of the expedited procedure set out in paragraph 5.  
5. In the event that the respondent so requests within forty-five (45) days after  the tribunal is constituted, the tribunal shall decide on an expedited basis an objection  under paragraph 4 or any objection that the dispute is not within the tribunal’s  competence, including an objection that the dispute is not within the tribunal’s  jurisdiction. The tribunal shall suspend any proceedings on the merits and issue a  decision or award on the objection(s), stating the grounds therefor, no later than one  hundred and fifty (150) days after the date of the request. However, if a disputing  party requests a hearing, the tribunal may take an additional thirty (30) days to issue  the decision or award. Regardless of whether a hearing is requested, a tribunal may,  on a showing of extraordinary cause, delay issuing its decision or award by an  additional brief period, which may not exceed thirty (30) days. 
56  
6. When the tribunal decides a respondent’s objection under paragraphs 4 or 5,  the tribunal may, if warranted, award to the prevailing disputing party reasonable  costs and attorney’s fees incurred in submitting or opposing the objection. In  determining whether such an award is warranted, the tribunal shall consider whether  either the claimant’s claim or the respondent’s objection was frivolous, and shall  provide the disputing parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.  
7. For greater certainty, if a claimant submits a claim to arbitration under this  Section, the claimant has the burden of proving all elements of its claim, consistent  with general principles of law applicable to international arbitration.  
8. Without prejudice to Article 11 (Subrogation), a respondent may not assert as  a defence, counterclaim, right of set-off, or for any other reason that the claimant or  the enterprise referred to in paragraph 1(b) of Article 26 (Submission of a Claim to  Arbitration) has received or will receive indemnification or other compensation for all  or part of the alleged damages pursuant to an indemnity, guarantee or insurance  contract.  
ARTICLE 31  
Transparency of Arbitral Proceedings  
1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 4, the respondent shall, after receiving the  following documents, promptly transmit them to the non-disputing Party:  
(a) the request for consultations; 
(b) the notice of arbitration; 
(c) pleadings, memorials, and briefs submitted to the tribunal by a disputing  party and any written submissions submitted pursuant to Article 34  (Consolidation); 
(d) minutes or transcripts of hearings of the tribunal, where available; and (e) orders, awards, and decisions of the tribunal.  
2. Subject to agreement by the disputing parties, the tribunal may conduct  hearings open to the public and, in such case, shall determine, in consultation with  the disputing parties, the appropriate logistical arrangements. However, any disputing  party that intends to use information designated as protected information or otherwise  subject to paragraph 3 in a hearing shall so advise the tribunal. The tribunal shall  make appropriate arrangements to protect the information from disclosure.  
3. Nothing in this Section requires a respondent to disclose protected information  or to furnish or allow access to information that it may withhold in accordance with  Article 15 (Security Exceptions) or Article 17 (Protection of Confidential Information).  
4. Any protected information that is submitted to the tribunal shall be protected 
57  
from disclosure in accordance with the following procedures:  
(a) neither the disputing parties nor the tribunal shall disclose to any non disputing Party or to the public any protected information where the disputing  party that provided the information clearly designates it in accordance with  sub-paragraph (b); 
(b) any disputing party claiming that certain information constitutes  protected information shall clearly designate the information at the time it is  submitted to the tribunal; and 
(c) a disputing party shall, within seven (7) days after it submits a document  containing information claimed to be protected information, submit a redacted  version of the document that does not contain the information. Only the  redacted version shall be disclosed in accordance with paragraph 1.  
ARTICLE 32  
Governing Law  
1. When a claim is submitted under Article 26 (Submission of a Claim to  Arbitration), the tribunal shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with this  Agreement and applicable rules of international law.17  
2. A joint decision of the Parties, declaring their interpretation of a provision of this  Chapter shall be binding on a tribunal of any ongoing or subsequent dispute, and any  decision or award issued by such a tribunal must be consistent with that joint decision.  
ARTICLE 33  
Expert Reports  
Without prejudice to the appointment of other kinds of experts where authorised by the  applicable arbitration rules, a tribunal, at the request of a disputing party or, unless the  disputing parties disapprove, on its own initiative, may appoint one or more experts to  report to it in writing on any factual issue concerning environmental, health, safety or  other scientific matters raised by a disputing party in a proceeding, subject to such  terms and conditions as the disputing parties may agree.  
ARTICLE 34  
Consolidation  
Where two or more claims have been submitted separately to arbitration under this  Section and the claims have a question of law or fact in common and arise out of the    
17 For greater certainty, this provision is without prejudice to any consideration of the domestic law of  the respondent when it is relevant to the claim as a matter of fact. 
58  
same events or circumstances, all concerned disputing parties may agree to  consolidate those claims in any manner they deem appropriate.  
ARTICLE 35  
Awards  
1. Where a tribunal makes a final award against a respondent, the tribunal may  award, separately or in combination, only:  
(a) monetary damages and any applicable interest; and  
(b) restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that the  respondent may pay monetary damages and any applicable interest in lieu of  restitution.  
2. A tribunal may also award costs and attorney’s fees in accordance with this  Section and the applicable arbitration rules.  
3. For greater certainty, if an investor of a Party submits a claim to arbitration under  paragraph 1(a) of Article 26 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), it may only recover  for loss or damage that it has incurred in its capacity as an investor of a Party.  
4. Subject to paragraph 1, where a claim is submitted to arbitration under  paragraph 1(b) of Article 26 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration):  
(a) any award of restitution of property shall provide that restitution be  made to the enterprise; 
(b) any award of monetary damages and any applicable interest shall  provide that the sum be paid to the enterprise; and 
(c) the award shall provide that it is made without prejudice to any right that  any person may have under applicable domestic law in relation to the relief.  
5. A tribunal shall not award punitive damages.  
6. A disputing party shall not seek enforcement of a final award until:  (a) in the case of a final award made under the ICSID Convention:  
(i) one hundred and twenty (120) days have elapsed from the date  the award was rendered and no disputing party has requested revision  or annulment of the award; or  
(ii) revision or annulment proceedings have been completed; and 
(b) in the case of a final award made under the ICSID Additional Facility  Rules, the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules or the rules selected pursuant to 
59  
paragraph 3(d) of Article 26 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration):  
(i) ninety (90) days have elapsed from the date the award was  rendered and no disputing party has commenced a proceeding to revise,  set aside or annul the award; or  
(ii) a court has dismissed or allowed an application to revise, set  aside or annul the award and there is no further appeal.  
7. An award made by a tribunal shall have no binding force except between the  disputing parties and in respect of the particular case.  
8. In the event that an appellate mechanism for reviewing awards rendered by  investor-State dispute settlement tribunals is developed in the future under other  institutional arrangements, the Parties shall consider whether awards rendered under  this Article should be subject to that appellate mechanism.  
ARTICLE 36  
Service of Documents  
Delivery of notice and other documents to a Party shall be made to the place named  for that Party listed in Annex 10-C (Service of Documents on a Party). 
60  
Section C：Definitions  
For the purposes of this Chapter:  
“Centre” means the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes  established by the ICSID Convention.  
“claimant” means an investor of a Party that is a party to an investment dispute with  the other Party. If that investor is a natural person, who is a permanent resident of a  Party and a national of the other Party, that natural person may not submit a claim to  arbitration against that latter Party.  
“covered investment” means, with respect to a Party, an investment in its territory  of an investor of the other Party, in existence as of the date of entry into force of this  Chapter or established, acquired, or expanded thereafter and which, where applicable,  has been admitted in accordance with relevant laws and regulations of the former  Party.  
“disputing parties” means the claimant and the respondent.  
“disputing party” means either the claimant or the respondent.  
“enterprise” means any entity constituted or organised under applicable law, whether  or not for profit, and whether privately or governmentally owned or controlled, including  a corporation, trust, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, association, or  similar organisation; and a branch of an enterprise.  
“enterprise of a Party” means an enterprise constituted or organised under the law  of a Party and a branch located in the territory of a Party and carrying out business  activities there.  

“existing” means in effect on the date of entry into force of the 2023  Protocol.

“freely usable currency” means “freely usable currency” as determined by the  International Monetary Fund under its Articles of Agreement.  
“government procurement” means the process by which a government obtains the  use of or acquires goods or services, or any combination thereof, for governmental  purposes and not with a view to commercial sale or resale, or use in the production or  supply of goods or services for commercial sale or resale.  
“ICSID Additional Facility Rules” means the Rules Governing the Additional Facility  for the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the International Centre for  Settlement of Investment Disputes.  
“ICSID Convention” means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes  between States and Nationals of Other States, done at Washington, 18 March 1965.  
“investment” means every asset that an investor owns or controls, directly or 
61  
indirectly, that has the following characteristics of an investment, including such  characteristics as the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of  gain or profit, or the assumption of risk. Forms that an investment may take include:18 
(a) an enterprise;  
(b) shares, stock, and other forms of equity participation in an enterprise;  
(c) bonds, debentures, other debt instruments, and loans (including loans  to, or debt securities issued by a Party);19 
(d) futures, options and other derivatives; 
(e) turnkey, construction, management, production, concession, revenue sharing, and other similar contracts; 
(f) intellectual property rights; 
(g) licences, authorisations, permits, and similar rights conferred pursuant  to domestic law;20 and  
(h) other tangible or intangible, movable or immovable property, and  related property rights, such as leases, mortgages, liens, and pledges.  
“investor of a non-Party” means, with respect to a Party, an investor that attempts  to make, is making, or has made an investment in the territory of that Party, that is not  an investor of a Party.  
“investor of a Party” means a Party, a national or an enterprise of a Party, that  attempts to make, is making, or has made an investment in the territory of the other  Party. 
“measure” means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation,  rule, procedure, decision, or any other form.  
“national” means:  
  
18 The term “investment” does not include an order or judgment entered in a judicial or administrative  action.  
19 Some forms of debt, such as bonds, debentures, and long-term notes, are more likely to have the  characteristics of an investment, while other forms of debt, such as claims to payment that are  immediately due and result from the sale of goods or services, are less likely to have such  characteristics.  
20 Whether a particular type of licence, authorisation, permit, or similar instrument (including a  concession, to the extent that it has the nature of such an instrument) has the characteristics of an  investment also depends on such factors as the nature and extent of the rights that the holder has under  the law of the Party. Among the licences, authorisations, permits, and similar instruments that do not  have the characteristics of an investment are those that do not create any rights protected under  domestic law. For greater certainty, the foregoing is without prejudice to whether any asset associated  with the licence, authorisation, permit, or similar instrument has the characteristics of an investment. 
62  
(a) for the People's Republic of China, a natural person who is a national  of the People's Republic of China as defined in the Nationality Law of  the People's Republic of China; and 
(b) for the Republic of Singapore, a citizen of Singapore within the  meaning of its Constitution and its domestic laws.  
“non-disputing Party” means the Party that is not a party to an investment dispute.  “person” means a natural person or an enterprise.  
“person of a Party” means a national or an enterprise of a Party.  
“protected information” means confidential information or information that is  privileged or otherwise protected from disclosure under a Party’s law.  
“respondent” means the Party that is a party to an investment dispute.  “Secretary-General” means the Secretary-General of ICSID. 


CHAPTER 11  
ECONOMIC COOPERATION  
ARTICLE 1  
Objectives  
1. The objectives of this Chapter are:  
(a) to further strengthen bilateral cooperation in view of recent regional and  international strategic developments;  
(b) to reaffirm existing arrangements already in place for bilateral cooperation;  and  
(c) to explore new areas of collaboration between the Parties.  
2. The areas of cooperation may include, but are not limited to:  (a) Cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative;  
(b) Trade and Investment Promotion;  
(c) Participation in China’s Regional Development;  
(e) Tourism Cooperation;  
(e) Human Resource Development;  
(f) Facilitation of “Go Global” Efforts of Chinese Enterprises.  
ARTICLE 2  
Cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative  
1. Recognising that the Belt and Road Initiative is important for deepening all  round cooperation between the Parties, realising the goal of common development,  developing and strengthening connectivity and promoting regional peace and  development, the Parties will jointly promote cooperation on the Belt and Road  Initiative and explore the converging points between the Belt and Road Initiative and  each Party’s national development priorities, thereby enhancing win-win cooperation  and co-prosperity. 
68  
2. Guided by the principle that “the Belt and Road Initiative be jointly implemented  through consultation to meet the interests of all”, the Parties will carry out cooperation  in areas such as coordination enhancement, connectivity enhancement, trade  connectivity, financial integration and people-to-people ties. The Parties shall  strengthen connectivity and mutual support, and draw on each Party’s experience.  
3. The Parties will strengthen cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative,  including in the three platforms of infrastructure connectivity, financial connectivity and  third party cooperation.  
4. The Parties will jointly promote the connectivity of the Belt and Road through  the existing bilateral cooperation mechanisms, such as the China-Singapore Joint  Council for Bilateral Cooperation (JCBC), and multilateral mechanisms participated by  the Parties to explore new opportunities of cooperation and coordinate, where  applicable, on major issues of cooperation.  
ARTICLE 3  
Trade and Investment Promotion  
1. Recognising that strong trade and investment flows are important for the  development of their respective economies, the Parties shall explore strengthening  cooperation in trade and investment promotion.  
2. To achieve the above, the Parties shall encourage and facilitate activities  which include the following:  
(a) policy dialogue to promote and expand trade and investment between  the Parties;  
(b) exchanging views on important economic and trade issues, and holding  consultations to solve common problems relating to bilateral trade and  investment;  
(c) jointly identifying priority sectors with strong cooperation potential based  on the Parties’ complementary strengths, and exploring ways of  collaboration in the identified sectors;  
(d) supporting exchanges and dialogues between the business  communities of the Parties; and  
(e) reinforcing economic cooperation between the Parties, including in third  countries.  
3. The Parties shall guide and co-ordinate cooperation in trade and investment  promotion through the existing mechanisms of the national-level JCBC, the Investment  Promotion Committee (IPC), the MOFCOM–MTI Dialogue and provincial-level 
69  
business councils. The Parties shall continually strengthen the Government-to Government mechanisms, and explore new means of cooperation toward this end.  
4. The Parties note that the participation of semi-official and non-official  organisations in the area of trade and investment promotion has positive effect on  bilateral economic cooperation. The Parties agree to support these organisations,  where possible, to foster trade and investment promotion activities.  
5. The Parties note the importance of accelerating and promoting broader  exchanges and cooperation between the business communities of the Parties and  shall encourage business promotion activities so as to foster exchanges and  networking among their respective enterprises.  
ARTICLE 4  
Participation in China’s Regional Development  
1. Recognising that participation in China’s regional development is a key pillar in  bilateral relations, which is exemplified by the flagship Suzhou Industrial Park project,  the Parties shall continue to work closely to broaden and deepen cooperation in this  area.  
2. Noting that the flagship Sino-Singapore Tianjin Eco-city project is another key  step forward in bilateral cooperation in regional development, both Parties agree to  work closely with a view to developing the city as a model for sustainable development  and enhance cooperation in areas including environmental protection and resource  and energy conservation.  
3. Recognising that the China-Singapore (Chongqing) Demonstration Initiative on  Strategic Connectivity is the key priority demonstration project under China’s Belt and  Road Initiative, Western Region Development and Yangtze River Economic Belt  strategies, both Parties agree to work closely in four priority areas of collaboration, viz.  financial services, aviation, transport and logistics, and information and  communications technology, in order to enhance connectivity and drive the  development of Western China. The Parties also agree to accord the Initiative with  necessary innovative measures, including but not limited to policy and institutional  innovations, which shall be consistent with China’s Comprehensive Deepening of  Reforms.  
  
4. The Parties reaffirm the role of the bilateral provincial business councils as the  important mechanism of their cooperation to support China’s regional development  initiatives. The Parties agree to strengthen their existing collaboration as well as  explore new areas of cooperation through the councils.  
5. The Parties shall also work with the respective business chambers in China and  Singapore to encourage participation in regional trade fairs in China.  
6.The Parties agree in-principle that any business collaboration should be  commercially led and the governments should play a facilitative role. 
70  
ARTICLE 5  
Tourism Cooperation  
1. Recognising that strong tourism and people-to-people flows are important for  the long-term development of their respective economies, the Parties shall continue  to strengthen cooperation in tourism promotion and exchanges through regular  dialogues.  
2. The Parties shall continue to further co-operate in the field of tourism. The  Parties also note the importance of expanding and deepening tourism cooperation, in  particular, to increase edu-tourism and student exchanges.  
3. The Parties shall co-operate in good faith to promote tourism by exploring ways  and initiatives to introduce greater convenience to travellers. This would further  enhance the mutual understanding and friendly exchanges between the peoples of  the Parties.  
4. Each Party will encourage the participation of the tourism enterprises in travel  marts, exhibitions and tourism festivals so as to enhance two-way communication and  cooperation, with a view to deepening understanding of the needs of tourists from the  other Party and improving the quality of service. 
ARTICLE 6  
Human Resource Development  
1. Recognising that human resource development is a key pillar in bilateral  relations, the Parties agree to continue conducting bilateral exchanges and training  programmes for officials in order to enhance cooperation in human resources training  and development, and deepen mutual understanding and friendship between both  countries. In this regard, the Parties recognise the arrangements established under  the Framework Agreement between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of  Singapore and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Peoples’ Republic of China on the  Exchange Programme for Middle- to Senior-Level Officials (2015-2019), signed on 27  October 2014.  
ARTICLE 7  
Facilitation of “Go Global” Efforts of Chinese Enterprises  
1. Recognising that facilitating the “Go Global” efforts of Chinese enterprises is a  key pillar of bilateral cooperation, the Parties shall intensify their collaboration in this  area. 
71  
2. The Parties shall explore more ways to facilitate business exchanges and  promote awareness amongst Chinese companies on the advantages of using  Singapore as an effective regional platform as well as explore collaborative  opportunities in third country markets.  
3. The Parties agree that any business collaboration should be commercially led  and the role that governments can play is to raise awareness of such opportunities  and provide platforms such as business seminars and networking sessions to facilitate  exchanges.  
4. The Parties shall constantly explore new avenues of collaboration through  platforms such as the MOFCOM–MTI Dialogue, the IPC and the JCBC.        


     CHAPTER 12 DISPUTE SETTLEMENT


ARTICLE 91
Definitions

Unless otherwise provided, for the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) complaining Party means the Party that requests consultations under Article 94 (Consultations); and

(b) Party complained against means the Party to which the request for consultations is made under Article 94 (Consultations).


ARTICLE 92
Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter shall apply to disputes arising under this Agreement which shall also include the Annexes and the contents therein.

2. Any special or additional rules and procedures on dispute settlement for application to this Chapter may be made with the consent of the Parties.

3. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, or as the Parties may otherwise agree, this Chapter shall apply with respect to the avoidance or settlement of disputes between the Parties concerning their respective rights and obligations under this Agreement.

4. This Chapter may be invoked in respect of measures affecting the observance of this Agreement taken by central, regional or local governments or authorities within the territory of a Party.

5. Subject to paragraph 6, nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any right of the Parties to have recourse to dispute settlement procedures available under any other treaty to which they are parties.

6. Once dispute settlement proceedings have been initiated under this Chapter or under any other treaty to which the Parties are parties, concerning a particular right or obligation arising under this Agreement or that other treaty, the forum selected by the complaining Party shall be used to the exclusion of any other for such dispute.

7. Paragraphs 5 and 6 shall not apply where the Parties expressly agree to the use of more than one dispute settlement forum in respect of that particular dispute.

8. For the purposes of paragraphs 5, 6 and 7, the complaining Party shall be deemed to have selected a forum when it has requested the establishment of, or referred a dispute to, a dispute settlement panel or tribunal in accordance with this Chapter or any other agreement to which the Parties are parties.


ARTICLE 93
Liaison Office

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, each Party shall:

(a) designate an office that shall be responsible for all liaison affairs referred to in this Chapter;

(b) be responsible for the operation and costs of its designated office; and

(c) notify the other Party of the location and address of its designated office within thirty (30) days after the completion of its domestic procedures for the entry into force of this Agreement.

2. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, the submission of any request or document under this Chapter to the designated office of a Party shall be deemed to be the submission of that request or document to that Party.


ARTICLE 94
Consultations

1. A Party complained against shall accord due consideration and adequate opportunity for consultations regarding a request for consultations made by the complaining Party with respect to any matter affecting the implementation or application of this Agreement whereby:

(a) any benefit accruing to the complaining Party directly or indirectly under this Agreement is being nullified or impaired; or

(b) the attainment of any objective of this Agreement is being impeded,

as a result of the failure of the Party complained against to carry out its obligations under this Agreement.

2. Any request for consultations shall be submitted in writing, which shall include the specific measures at issue, and the factual and legal basis (including the provisions of this Agreement alleged to have been breached and any other relevant provisions) of the complaint. The complaining Party shall send the request to the Party complained against. Upon receipt, the Party complained against shall acknowledge receipt of such request to the complaining Party.

3. If a request for consultations is made, the Party complained against shall reply to the request within seven (7) days after the date of its receipt and shall enter into consultations in good faith within a period of not more than thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of the request, with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory solution. If the Party complained against does not respond within the aforesaid seven (7) days, or does not enter into consultations within the aforesaid thirty (30) days, then the complaining Party may proceed directly to request the appointment of an arbitral tribunal under Article 96 (Appointment of Arbitral Tribunals).

4. The Parties shall make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory resolution of any matter through consultations. To this end, the Parties shall:

(a) provide sufficient information to enable a full examination of how the measure might affect the operation of this Agreement; and

(b) treat as confidential any information exchanged in the consultations which the other Party has designated as confidential.

5. Consultations shall be confidential, and are without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further or other proceedings.

6. In cases of urgency, including those which concern perishable goods, the Parties shall enter into consultations within a period of no more than ten (10) days after the date of receipt of the request by the Party complained against. If the consultations fail to settle the dispute within a period of twenty (20) days after the date of receipt of the request by the Party complained against, the complaining Party may proceed directly to make a written request to the Party complained against to appoint an arbitral tribunal under Article 96 (Appointment of Arbitral Tribunals).

7. In cases of urgency, including those which concern perishable goods, the Parties and arbitral tribunals shall make every effort to accelerate the proceedings to the greatest extent possible.


ARTICLE 95
Conciliation or Mediation

1. The Parties may, at any time, agree to conciliation or mediation, which may begin and be terminated by the Parties at any time.

2. If both Parties agree, conciliation or mediation proceedings may continue before any person or body as may be agreed by the Parties while the dispute proceeds for resolution before an arbitral tribunal appointed under Article 96 (Appointment of Arbitral Tribunals).

3. Proceedings involving conciliation and mediation, and positions taken by the Parties during these proceedings, shall be confidential, and without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further or other proceedings.


ARTICLE 96
Appointment of Arbitral Tribunals

1. If the consultations referred to in Article 94 (Consultations) fail to settle a dispute within sixty (60) days after the date of receipt of the request for consultations, or within twenty (20) days after such date in cases of urgency including those which concern perishable goods, the complaining Party may make a written request to the Party complained against to appoint an arbitral tribunal under this Article.

2. A request for the appointment of an arbitral tribunal shall give the reasons for the request, including the identification of:

(a) the specific measure at issue; and

(b) the factual and legal basis (including the provisions of this Agreement alleged to have been breached and any other relevant provisions) for the complaint sufficient to present the problem clearly.


ARTICLE 97
Composition of Arbitral Tribunals

1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the arbitral tribunal shall have three
(3) members.

2. The complaining Party shall appoint an arbitrator to the arbitral tribunal within twenty (20) days of the receipt of the request for appointment of the arbitral tribunal under Article 96 (Appointment of Arbitral Tribunals) by the Party complained against. The Party complained against shall appoint an arbitrator to the arbitral tribunal within thirty (30) days of its receipt of the request for appointment of the arbitral tribunal under Article 96 (Appointment of Arbitral

Tribunals). If a Party fails to appoint an arbitrator within such period, then the arbitrator appointed by the other Party shall act as the sole arbitrator of the tribunal.

3. Once the complaining Party and the Party complained against have appointed their respective arbitrators subject to paragraph 2, the Parties shall endeavour to agree on an additional arbitrator who shall serve as chair. If the Parties are unable to agree on the chair of the arbitral tribunal within thirty (30) days after the date on which the last arbitrator has been appointed under paragraph 2, they shall request the Director-General of the WTO to appoint the chair and such appointment shall be accepted by them. In the event that the Director-General is a national of either Party, the Deputy Director-General or the officer next in seniority who is not a national of either Party shall be requested to appoint the chair.

4. The date of composition of the arbitral tribunal shall be the date on which the chair is appointed under paragraph 3, or the 30th day after the receipt of the request under Article 96 (Appointment of Arbitral Tribunals) where only a sole arbitrator of the tribunal is available.

5. If an arbitrator appointed under this Article resigns or becomes unable to act, a successor arbitrator shall be appointed in the same manner as prescribed for the appointment of the original arbitrator and the successor shall have all the powers and duties of the original arbitrator. The work of the arbitral tribunal shall be suspended during the appointment of the successor arbitrator.

6. Any person appointed as a member or chair of the arbitral tribunal shall have expertise or experience in law, international trade, other matters covered by this Agreement or the resolution of disputes arising under international trade agreements, and shall be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity, reliability, sound judgment and independence. Additionally, the chair shall not be a national of either Party and shall not have his or her usual place of residence in the territory of, nor be employed by, either Party.

7. Where the original arbitral tribunal is required for a matter as provided in this Chapter but cannot hear the matter for any reason, a new tribunal shall be appointed under this Article.


ARTICLE 98
Functions of Arbitral Tribunals

1. The function of an arbitral tribunal is to make an objective assessment of the dispute before it, including an examination of the facts of the case and the applicability of and conformity with this Agreement. Where the arbitral tribunal concludes that a measure is inconsistent with a provision of this Agreement, it

shall recommend  that the Party complained against bring the measure into conformity with that provision. In addition to its recommendations, the arbitral tribunal may suggest ways in which the Party complained against could implement the recommendations. In its findings and recommendations, the arbitral tribunal cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations provided in this Agreement.

2. The arbitral tribunal shall have the following terms of reference unless the Parties agree otherwise within twenty (20) days from its composition:

"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions in the CSFTA, the matter referred to this arbitral tribunal by (name of the complaining Party), and to make findings, determinations and recommendations provided for in the CSFTA."

The arbitral tribunal shall address the relevant provisions in this Agreement cited by the Parties.

3. The arbitral tribunal established pursuant to Article 96 (Appointment of Arbitral Tribunals):

(a) shall consult regularly with the Parties and provide adequate opportunities for the development of a mutually satisfactory resolution;

(b) shall make its decision in accordance with this Agreement and the rules of international law applicable between the Parties; and

(c) shall set out, in its decision, its findings of law and fact, together with the reasons therefor.

4. The decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be final and binding on the Parties.

5. An arbitral tribunal shall take its decision by consensus; provided that where an arbitral tribunal is unable to reach consensus, it may take its decision by majority opinion.

6. The arbitral tribunal shall, in consultation with the Parties and apart from the matters set out in paragraph 2 of Article 96 (Appointment of Arbitral Tribunals), and Article 99 (Proceedings of Arbitral Tribunals), regulate its own procedures in relation to the rights of Parties to be heard and its deliberations.


ARTICLE 99
Proceedings of Arbitral Tribunals


1. An arbitral tribunal shall meet in closed session. The Parties shall be present at the meetings only when invited by the arbitral tribunal to appear before it.

2. The venue for the substantive meetings of the arbitral tribunal shall be decided by mutual agreement between the Parties, failing which the first substantive meeting shall be held in the capital of the Party complained against, with the second substantive meeting to be held in the capital of the complaining Party.

3. After consulting the Parties, the arbitral tribunal shall, as soon as practical and possible within fifteen (15) days after the composition of the arbitral tribunal, fix the timetable for the arbitral process. In determining the timetable for the arbitral process, the arbitral tribunal shall provide sufficient time for the Parties to prepare their respective submissions. The arbitral tribunal should set precise deadlines for written submissions by the Parties and the Parties shall respect these deadlines.

4. The deliberations of an arbitral tribunal and the documents submitted to it shall be kept confidential. Nothing in this Article shall preclude a Party from disclosing statements of its own positions or its submissions to the public; a Party shall treat as confidential information submitted by the other Party to the arbitral tribunal which the submitting Party has designated as confidential. Where a Party submits a confidential version of its written submissions to the arbitral tribunal, it shall also, upon request by the other Party, provide a non-confidential summary of the information contained in its submissions that can be disclosed to the public.

5. The rules and procedures pertaining to the proceedings before the arbitral tribunal as set out in Annex 7 (Rules and Procedures for Arbitral Proceedings) shall apply unless the arbitral tribunal decides otherwise after consulting the Parties.

6. The report of the arbitral tribunal shall be drafted without the presence of the Parties in the light of the information provided and the statements made. The deliberations of the tribunal shall be confidential. Opinions expressed in the report of the arbitral tribunal by an individual arbitrator shall be anonymous.

7. Following the consideration of submissions, oral arguments and any information before it, the arbitral tribunal shall issue a draft report to the Parties, including both a descriptive section relating to the facts of the dispute and the arguments of the Parties and the arbitral tribunal's findings and conclusions. The arbitral tribunal shall accord adequate opportunity to the Parties to review the entirety of its draft report prior to its finalisation and shall include a discussion of any comments by the Parties in its final report.


8. The arbitral tribunal shall release to the Parties its final report within one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date of its composition. In cases of urgency, including those relating to perishable goods, the arbitral tribunal shall aim to issue its report to the Parties within sixty (60) days from the date of its composition. When the arbitral tribunal considers that it cannot release its final report within one hundred and twenty (120) days, or within sixty (60) days in cases of urgency, it shall inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the delay together with an estimate of the period within which it will issue its report. In no case should the period from the composition of an arbitral tribunal to the release of the report to Parties exceed one hundred and eighty (180) days.

9. The final report of the arbitral tribunal shall become a public document within ten (10) days after its release to the Parties.


ARTICLE 100
Suspension and Termination of Proceedings

1. Where the Parties agree, the arbitral tribunal may suspend its work at any time for a period not exceeding twelve (12)  months from  the date of such agreement. Upon the request of either Party, the arbitral proceeding shall be resumed after such suspension. If the work of the arbitral tribunal has been suspended for more than twelve (12) months, the authority for establishment of the arbitral tribunal shall lapse unless the Parties agree otherwise.

2. The Parties may agree to terminate the proceedings of an arbitral tribunal established under this Agreement before the release of the final report to them, in the event that a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute has been found.

3. Before the arbitral tribunal makes its decision, it may at any stage of the proceedings propose to the Parties that the dispute be settled amicably.


ARTICLE 101
Implementation

1. The Party complained against shall inform the complaining Party of its intention in respect of implementation of the recommendations and rulings of the arbitral tribunal.

2. If it is impracticable to comply immediately with the recommendations and rulings of the arbitral tribunal, the Party complained against shall have a reasonable period of time in which to do so. The reasonable period of time shall be mutually determined by the Parties or, where the Parties fail to agree on the reasonable period of time within thirty (30) days of the release of the arbitral

tribunal's final report, either Party may refer the matter to the original arbitral tribunal (to the extent this is possible), which shall, following consultations with the Parties, determine the reasonable period of time within thirty (30) days after the date of the referral of the matter to it. When the arbitral tribunal considers that it cannot provide its report within this timeframe, it shall inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the delay and shall submit its report no later than forty- five (45) days after the date of the referral of the matter to it.

3. Where there is disagreement as to the existence or consistency with this Agreement of measures taken within the reasonable period of time referred to in paragraph 2 to comply with the recommendations of the arbitral tribunal, such dispute shall be referred to the original arbitral tribunal, wherever possible. The arbitral tribunal shall provide its report to the Parties within sixty (60) days after the date of the referral of the matter to it. When the arbitral tribunal considers that it cannot provide its report within this timeframe, it shall inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the delay and shall submit its report no later than seventy-five (75) days after the date of the referral of the matter to it.


ARTICLE 102
Compensation and Suspension of Concessions or Benefits

1. Compensation and the suspension of concessions or benefits are temporary measures available in the event that the recommendations and rulings are not implemented within  a reasonable period of  time. However,  neither compensation nor the suspension of concessions or benefits is preferred to full implementation of a recommendation to bring a measure into conformity with this Agreement. Compensation is voluntary and, if granted, shall be consistent with this Agreement.

2. If the Party complained against fails to bring the measure found to be inconsistent with this Agreement into compliance with the recommendations of the arbitral tribunal within the reasonable period of time determined pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 101 (Implementation), that Party shall, if so requested, enter into negotiations with the complaining Party with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory agreement on any necessary compensatory adjustment.

3. If no mutually satisfactory agreement on compensation has been reached within twenty (20) days after the request of the complaining Party to enter into negotiations on compensatory adjustment, the complaining Party may request the original arbitral tribunal to determine the appropriate level of any suspension of concessions or benefits conferred on the Party which has failed to bring the measure found to be inconsistent with this Agreement into compliance with the recommendations of the arbitral tribunal. The arbitral tribunal shall provide its report to the Parties within thirty (30) days after the date of the referral of the matter to it.  When the arbitral tribunal considers that it cannot provide its report

within this timeframe, it shall inform the Parties concerned in writing of the reasons for the delay and shall submit its report no later than forty-five (45) days after the date of the referral of the matter to it. Concessions or benefits shall not be suspended during the course of the arbitral proceedings.

4. Any suspension of concessions or benefits shall be restricted to those accruing under this Agreement to the Party which has failed to bring the measure found to be inconsistent with this Agreement into compliance with the recommendations of the arbitral tribunal.

5. In considering what concessions or benefits to suspend:

(a) the complaining Party should first seek to suspend concessions or benefits in the same sector or sectors as those affected by the measure or other matter that the arbitral tribunal has found to be inconsistent with this Agreement or to have caused nullification or impairment; and

(b) the complaining Party may suspend concessions or benefits in other sectors if it considers that it is not practicable or effective to suspend concessions or benefits in the same sector or sectors.

6. The suspension of concessions or benefits shall be temporary and shall only be applied until such time as the measure found to be inconsistent with this Agreement has been removed, or the Party that must implement the arbitral tribunal's recommendations has done so, or a mutually satisfactory solution is reached.


ARTICLE 103
Language

1. All proceedings pursuant to this Chapter shall be conducted in the English language.

2. Any document submitted for use in any proceedings pursuant to this Chapter shall be in the English language. If any original document is not in the English language, the Party submitting it for use in the proceedings pursuant to this Chapter shall provide an English translation of that document.


ARTICLE 104
Expenses

1. Each Party shall bear the costs of its appointed arbitrator and its own expenses and legal costs.


2. The costs of the chair of the arbitral tribunal and other expenses associated with the conduct of its proceedings shall be borne in equal parts by the Parties.

CHAPTER 13 EXCEPTIONS


ARTICLE 105
General Exceptions

1. For the purposes of Chapters 3 (Trade in Goods), 4 (Rules of Origin), 5 (Customs Procedures), 6 (Trade Remedies) and 7 (Technical Barriers to Trade, Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretive notes are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. For the purposes of Chapter 8 (Cross-Border Trade in Services),  subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a  manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable  discrimination against the other Party, or a disguised restriction on  cross-border trade in services, nothing in this Agreement shall be  construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by either Party of  measures:

(a) necessary to protect public morals or to maintain public order;1

(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

(c) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not inconsistent with this Agreement including those relating to:

(i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with the effects of a default on services contracts;

(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing and dissemination of personal data and the protection of confidentiality of individual records and accounts;

(iii) safety;

(d) inconsistent with Article 4 (National Treatment) of Chapter 8  (Cross-Border Trade in Services), provided that the difference in  treatment is aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective17 imposition or collection of direct taxes in respect of services or  service suppliers of the other Party;

(e) inconsistent with Article 5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) of  Chapter 8 (Cross-Border Trade in Services), provided that the  difference in treatment is the result of any tax convention.

1    The public order exception may be invoked only where a genuine and sufficiently serious threat is posed to one of the fundamental interests of society.
2    Measures that are aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or collection of direct taxes include measures taken by a Party under its taxation system which:



ARTICLE 106
Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a) to require a Party to furnish any information, the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests; or

(b) to  prevent  a  Party  from  taking  any  action  which  it  considers necessary for the protection of its essential security interests:

(i) relating to the supply of services as carried out directly or indirectly for the purpose of provisioning a military establishment;

(ii) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials from which they are derived;

(iii) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or

(iv) relating to protection of critical public infrastructure, including critical communication infrastructure, from deliberate attempts intended to disable or degrade such infrastructures; or



(i) apply to non-resident service suppliers in recognition of the fact that the tax obligation of non-residents is determined with respect to taxable items sourced or located in the Party's territory; or
(ii) apply to non-residents in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes in the Party's territory; or
(iii) apply to non-residents or residents in order to prevent the avoidance or evasion of taxes, including compliance measures; or
(iv) apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the territory of the other Party in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes on such consumers derived from sources in the Party's territory; or
(v) distinguish service suppliers subject to tax on worldwide taxable items from other service suppliers, in recognition of the difference in the nature of the tax base between them; or
(vi) determine, allocate or apportion income, profit, gain, loss, deduction or credit of resident persons or branches, or between related persons or branches of the same person, in order to safeguard the Party's tax base.

Tax terms or concepts in sub-paragraph (d) and in this footnote are determined according to tax definitions and concepts, or equivalent or similar definitions and concepts, under the domestic law of the Party taking the measure.

(c) to prevent a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security.


ARTICLE 107
Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments

1. In the event of serious balance-of-payments and external financial difficulties or threat thereof, a Party may:

(a) in the case of trade in goods, adopt restrictive import measures in accordance with the GATT 1994 and the Understanding on the Balance-of-Payments Provisions of the GATT 1994;

(b) in the case of trade in services, adopt or maintain restrictions on  which it has undertaken commitments, including on payments or  transfers for transactions related to such commitments. It is  recognised that particular pressures on the balance-of-payments  of a Party in the process of economic development or economic  transition may necessitate the use of restrictions to ensure, inter  alia, the maintenance of a level of financial reserves adequate for  the implementation of its programme of economic development or  economic transition.” 

17 Measures that are aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or collection of direct taxes include measures taken by a Party under its taxation system which: 
(i) apply to non-resident service suppliers in recognition of the fact that the tax obligation of  non-residents is determined with respect to taxable items sourced or located in the Party's  territory; or 
(ii) apply to non-residents in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes in the Party's  territory; or 
(iii) apply to non-residents or residents in order to prevent the avoidance or evasion of taxes,  including compliance measures; or 
(iv) apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the territory of the other Party in order  to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes on such consumers derived from sources  in the Party's territory; or 
(v) distinguish service suppliers subject to tax on worldwide taxable items from other service  suppliers, in recognition of the difference in the nature of the tax base between them; or 
(vi) determine, allocate or apportion income, profit, gain, loss, deduction or credit of resident  persons or branches, or between related persons or branches of the same person, in  order to safeguard the Party's tax base. 
Tax terms or concepts in sub-paragraph (d) and in this footnote are determined according to  tax definitions and concepts, or equivalent or similar definitions and concepts, under the  domestic law of the Party taking the measure.

2. The restrictions referred to in paragraph 1:

(a) shall be consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;

(b) shall avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and financial interests of the other Party;

(c) shall not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances described in paragraph 1;

(d) shall be temporary and be phased out progressively as the situation specified in paragraph 1 improves.

3. In determining the incidence of such restrictions, the Parties may give priority to economic sectors which are more essential to their economic or development programmes. However, such restrictions shall not be adopted or maintained for the purpose of protecting a particular sector.

4. Any restrictions adopted or maintained under paragraph 1, or any changes therein, shall be promptly notified to the other Party.

CHAPTER 14
GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 108
Scope of Application

This Agreement shall apply to:

(a) in respect of the People's Republic of China, the entire customs territory of the People's Republic of China according to the WTO definition at the time of her accession to the WTO on 11 December 2001. For this purpose, for the People's Republic of China, "territory" in this Agreement refers to the customs territory of the People's Republic of China; and

(b) in respect of the Republic of Singapore, its land territory, internal waters and territorial sea and any maritime area situated beyond the territorial sea which has been or might in the future be designated under its national law,  in  accordance with international law, as an area within which Singapore may exercise rights with regards to the sea, the sea-bed, the subsoil and the natural resources.


ARTICLE 109
State, Regional and Local Government

In fulfilling its obligations and commitments under this Agreement, each Party shall ensure their observance by regional and local governments and authorities in its territory as well as their observance by non-governmental bodies (in the exercise of powers delegated by central, state, regional or local governments or authorities) within its territory.


ARTICLE 110
Contact Point

Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communications between the Parties on any matter covered by this  Agreement.  On  the request of a Party, the contact point of the requested Party shall facilitate communication with the requesting Party.


ARTICLE 111
Implementation and Review

1. The Parties shall establish an FTA Joint Committee  to  be  chaired jointly by their respective Ministers or their designees, in order to supervise the implementation of this Agreement and also to review this Agreement.

2. The FTA Joint Committee may establish and delegate responsibilities to ad hoc and standing committees or working groups based  on mutually agreed terms of reference and composition thereof.

3. The FTA Joint Committee shall:

(a) monitor and review the general functioning of this Agreement;

(b) review specific matters related to the operation and implementation of this Agreement;

(c) study and recommend appropriate measures to resolve any issues arising from the implementation or application of any part of this Agreement;

(d) consider, at either Party's request, further concessions or issues not already dealt with by this Agreement;

(e) facilitate the avoidance and settlement of disputes arising under this Agreement, including through consultations pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement);

(f) consider and adopt any amendment to this Agreement or other modification to the commitments therein, subject to the completion of necessary domestic legal procedures by each Party;

(g) as appropriate, issue interpretations of this Agreement;

(h) consider ways to further the objectives of this Agreement; and/or

(i) take such other actions as the Parties may agree.

4. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the FTA Joint Committee shall convene:

(a) within a year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement and then in regular session every year, with such sessions to be held alternately in the territory of each Party; and

(b) in special session within thirty (30) days of the  request  of  a Party, with such sessions to be held in the territory of the other Party or at such location as may be agreed by the Parties.

5. Each Party shall treat any confidential information exchanged in relation to a meeting of the FTA Joint Committee on the same basis as the Party providing the information.






1

6. The FTA Joint Committee may, as it deems necessary,  refer  any matter arising under this Agreement, for joint consideration and decision by higher authorities.


ARTICLE 112
Relation to Other Agreements

1. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other under existing bilateral and multilateral agreements to which both Parties are parties, including the WTO Agreement.

2. In the event of any inconsistency between  this Agreement and  any other agreement to which both Parties  are parties, the  Parties  shall immediately consult with each other with a view to finding a mutually satisfactory solution.


ARTICLE 113
Annexes

The Annexes to this Agreement shall form an integral part of this Agreement.


ARTICLE 114
Amendments

This Agreement may be amended by agreement in writing by the Parties.


ARTICLE 115
Entry into Force, Duration and Termination

1. This Agreement shall enter into force on the 30th day after the date on which the Parties have exchanged written notifications confirming  the completion of their respective domestic procedures for the entry into force of this Agreement. The Parties shall complete their respective domestic procedures, and give their respective written notifications, to enable the entry into force of this Agreement by 1 January 2009.

2. Either Party may terminate this Agreement by written notification to the other Party, and such termination shall take effect six (6) months after the date of the notification.

3. Within thirty (30) days of delivery of a notification under paragraph 2, either Party may request consultations regarding whether the termination of any provision of this Agreement should take effect at a later date than provided under paragraph 2.  Such consultations shall commence within thirty
(30) days of a Party's delivery of such request.

CHAPTER 15  
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE  
ARTICLE 1  
Definitions  
For the purposes of this Chapter:  
(a) digital certificates are electronic documents or files that are issued or  otherwise linked to a party to an electronic communication or transaction for  the purpose of establishing the party’s identity;  
(b) electronic authentication means the process or act of providing  authenticity and reliability verification for the parties involved in electronic  signature to ensure the integrity and security of the electronic  communication or transaction;  
(c) personal information means any information, including data, about an  identified or identifiable individual; and  
(d) trade administration documents means forms issued or controlled by a  Party that must be completed by or for an importer or exporter in connection  with the import or export of goods.  
ARTICLE 2  
General Provisions  
1. The Parties recognise the economic growth and opportunities provided by  electronic commerce and the importance of frameworks that promote consumer  confidence in electronic commerce and of avoiding unnecessary barriers to its use  and development.  
2. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party that affect  trade by electronic means.  
3. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and other Chapters, the  other Chapters shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.  
ARTICLE 3  
Domestic Regulatory Frameworks 
74  
1. Each Party shall maintain domestic legal frameworks governing electronic  transactions based on the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce 1996 and  taking into account, as appropriate, other relevant international standards.  
2. Each Party shall:  
(a) minimise the regulatory burden on electronic commerce; and  
(b) ensure that regulatory frameworks support industry-led development of  electronic commerce.  
ARTICLE 4  
Electronic Authentication and Electronic Signatures  
1. Except in circumstances otherwise provided for under its laws and regulations, a  Party shall not deny the legal validity of a signature solely on the basis that the  signature is in electronic form.  
2. Each Party shall maintain or adopt, as soon as practicable, measures for  electronic authentication that:  
(a) permit participants in electronic transactions to determine the appropriate  authentication technologies for their electronic transactions;  
(b) permit participants in electronic transactions to have the opportunity to prove  before judicial or administrative authorities that their electronic transactions  comply with the Party’s domestic laws and regulations with respect to  authentication.  
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require that, for a particular category  of transactions, the method of authentication meets certain performance standards or  is certified by an authority accredited in accordance with its laws and regulations.  
4. The Parties shall work towards the mutual recognition of digital certificates and  electronic signatures.  
5. The Parties shall encourage the use of interoperable electronic authentication  and digital certificates.  
ARTICLE 5  
Customs Duties  
1. Each Party shall maintain its practice of not imposing customs duties on  electronic transmissions between the Parties, consistent with the WTO Ministerial  Decision of 18 December 2017 in relation to the Work Programme on Electronic  Commerce (WT/MIN(17)/65). 
75  
2. Each Party reserves the right to adjust its practice referred to in paragraph 1 in  accordance with any further WTO Ministerial Decisions in relation to the Work  Programme on Electronic Commerce.  
ARTICLE 6  
Transparency  
1. Each Party shall promptly publish, or otherwise promptly make publicly available  where publication is not practicable, all relevant measures of general application which  pertain to, or affect, the operation of this Chapter.  
2. Each Party shall respond promptly to all requests by the other Party for specific  information on any of its measures of general application within the meaning of  paragraph 1.  
ARTICLE 7  
Online Consumer Protection  
1. The Parties recognise the importance of adopting and maintaining transparent  and effective consumer protection measures for electronic commerce as well as  measures conducive to the development of consumer confidence.  
2. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, provide protection for consumers using  electronic commerce that affords a similar level of protection to that provided for  consumers of other forms of commerce under its relevant laws, regulations and  policies.  
3. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation between their respective  competent authorities in charge of consumer protection on activities related to  electronic commerce in order to enhance consumer protection.  
ARTICLE 8  
Personal Information Protection  
1. The Parties recognise the economic and social benefits of protecting the personal  information of users of electronic commerce and the contribution that this makes to  enhancing consumer confidence in electronic commerce.  
2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures that protect the personal  information of users of electronic commerce. In the development of such measures,  each Party shall, to the extent possible, take into account international standards and  the criteria of relevant international organisations, to promote mutual compatibility  between their regimes.1 
  
1 For greater certainty, a Party may comply with the obligation in this paragraph by adopting or  maintaining measures such as comprehensive privacy, personal information or personal data  protection laws, sector-specific laws covering privacy, or laws that provide for the enforcement of  voluntary undertakings by enterprises relating to privacy. 
76  
3. Recognising that the Parties may take different legal approaches to protecting  online personal information, the Parties shall endeavour to exchange information on  their respective regimes to promote compatibility between them.  
ARTICLE 9  
Paperless Trading  
1. Each Party shall endeavour to make trade administration documents available to  the public in electronic form.  
2. Each Party shall endeavour to accept trade administration documents submitted  electronically as the legal equivalent of the paper version of those documents.  
ARTICLE 10  
Cooperation on Electronic Commerce  
1. The Parties agree to work together to assist small and medium-sized enterprises  to overcome obstacles to the use of electronic commerce.  
2. The Parties agree to share information and experience on issues related to  electronic commerce, including, inter alia, laws and regulations, rules and standards,  and best practices.  
3. The Parties shall encourage cooperation in research and training activities to  enhance the development of electronic commerce.  
4. The Parties shall encourage business exchanges, cooperative activities and joint  electronic commerce projects.  
5. The Parties shall actively participate in regional and multilateral fora to promote  the development of electronic commerce in a cooperative manner.  
ARTICLE 11  
Non-Application of Dispute Settlement  
Neither Party shall have recourse to Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter  arising under this Chapter. 

CHAPTER 16  
COMPETITION  
ARTICLE 1  
Definitions  
For purposes of this Chapter:  
(a) anticompetitive business conduct means business conduct or  transactions that adversely affect competition in the territory of a Party, such  as:  
(i) agreements between enterprises, decisions by associations of  enterprises and concerted practices, which have as their object or  effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition in the  territory of either Party as a whole or in a substantial part thereof;  
(ii) any abuse by one or more enterprises of a dominant position in the  territory of either Party as a whole or in a substantial part thereof; or  
(iii) concentrations between enterprises, which significantly impede  effective competition, in particular as a result of the creation or  strengthening of a dominant position in the territory of either Party as  a whole or in a substantial part thereof; and  
(b) competition laws means:  
(i) for China:  
(A) the Antimonopoly Law and its implementing regulations and  amendments; and  
(ii) for Singapore:  
(A) the Competition Act (Chapter 50B) and its implementing  regulations and amendments;  
(B) Part VII “Competition” of the Electricity Act (Chapter 89A), and  its amendments;  
(C) Part IX “Competition” of the Gas Act (Chapter 116A), and its  amendments;  
(D) the Airport Competition Code pursuant to the Civil Aviation  Authority of Singapore Act (Chapter 41), and its amendments; 
79  
(E) the Code of Practice for Market Conduct pursuant to the Media  Development Authority of Singapore Act (Chapter 172), and its  
amendments; and  
(F) the Code of Practice for Competition in the Provision of  Telecommunications Services pursuant to the  Telecommunications Act (Chapter 323), and its amendments.  
Where any of the competition laws of either Party as stated above is  subsequently superseded by a new law, the new law shall be considered a  “competition law” for the purposes of this Chapter.  
ARTICLE 2  
Objectives  
The Parties understand that proscribing anticompetitive business conduct,  implementing competition policies and cooperating on competition issues contribute  to preventing the benefits of trade liberalisation from being undermined and to  promoting economic efficiency and consumer welfare.  
ARTICLE 3  
Competition Laws and Authorities  
1. Each Party shall maintain competition laws that promote and protect the  competitive process in its market by proscribing anticompetitive business practices.  
2. Each Party shall maintain an authority or authorities responsible for the  enforcement of its competition laws.  

ARTICLE 4  
Principles in Law Enforcement  
1. Each Party shall be consistent with the principles of transparency, non discrimination and procedural fairness in competition law enforcement.  
2. Each Party shall apply its competition laws to all entities engaged in commercial  activities, subject to exclusions or exemptions provided for under its laws. Such  exclusions or exemptions should be transparent and be based on public policy or  public interest grounds.  
3. Each Party shall apply and enforce its competition laws in a manner, which  does not, in like circumstances, discriminate on the basis of nationality.  
4. Each Party shall ensure that before it imposes a sanction, or additional  restrictive condition or any other remedy, whichever is applicable under the Party’s domestic laws, against any person for violating its competition laws, it affords that person a reasonable opportunity to present opinion or evidence in its defence.

5. Each Party shall provide any person that is subject to the imposition of a
sanction, or additional restrictive condition or any other remedy, whichever is
applicable under the Party’s domestic laws, for violation of its competition laws, with
the opportunity to seek review of the sanction, or additional restrictive condition or any
other remedy under that Party's laws.

ARTICLE 5
Transparency
1. Each Party shall make public its competition laws, including procedural rules
for investigation.
2. Each Party shall ensure that a final decision by a competition authority finding

a violation of its competition laws is in writing, and sets out relevant findings of fact
and the legal basis for the decision.

3. Each Party shall make public the grounds for any final decision or order to
impose a sanction, or additional restrictive condition or any other remedy, whichever
is applicable under the Party’s domestic laws, and any appeal therefrom, subject to
that Party’s:

(a) (i) domestic laws and regulations;
(ii) need to safeguard confidential information; or
(iii) need to safeguard information on grounds of public policy or public
interest; and

(b) redactions of the final decision or order on the grounds in (a)(i) to (Iii) above.

ARTICLE 6
Cooperation in Law Enforcement

1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation and coordination between
the respective competition authorities to promote effective competition law
enforcement. Accordingly, each Party shall, on a best endeavour basis, cooperate
through notification, consultation, exchange of information and technical cooperation.

2. The Parties agree to cooperate in a manner compatible with their respective
laws, regulations and important interests, and within their reasonably available
resources.

ARTICLE 7
Consultation

In order to foster understanding between the Parties, or to address specific matters
that arise under this Chapter, a Party shall, on request of the other Party (the
“requesting Party”), enter into consultations with the requesting Party. In its request,
the requesting Party shall indicate, if relevant, how the matter affects trade or
investment between the Parties. The Party addressed shall accord full and
sympathetic consideration to the concerns of the requesting Party.

ARTICLE 8
Technical Cooperation

The Parties may promote technical cooperation, including exchange of experiences,
capacity-building through training programmes, workshops and_ research
collaborations for the purpose of enhancing each Party's capacity related to
competition policy and law enforcement.

ARTICLE 9
Independence of Competition Law Enforcement

1. Each Party shall ensure independence in decision-making by its authority or
authorities in relation to enforcement of competition laws.

2. The obligations under this Chapter shall not prejudice the independence of
each Party in enforcing its respective competition laws.
ARTICLE 10

Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Neither Party shall have recourse to Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter
arising under this Chapter.

CHAPTER 17
ENVIRONMENT AND TRADE

ARTICLE 1
Context and Objectives

1. Recalling the Stockholm Declaration on the Human Environment of 1972, the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development of 1992, Agenda 21 of 1992, the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation on Sustainable Development of 2002, the
Rio+20 Outcome Document “The Future We Want” of 2012, and the Transforming our
world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Parties acknowledge that
economic development, social development and environmental protection are
interdependent and mutually supportive components of sustainable development.

2. The Parties reaffirm their commitments to promoting economic development in
such a way as to contribute to the objective of sustainable development.

3. The Parties agree that environmental standards should not be used for trade
protectionist purposes.

ARTICLE 2
Levels of Protection

1. The Parties reaffirm each Party’s sovereign right to establish its own levels of
environmental protection and its own environmental development priorities, and adopt
or modify its environmental laws and policies.

2. Each Party shall seek to ensure that those laws and policies provide for and
encourage high levels of environmental protection, and shall strive to implement these
laws and policies effectively. Each Party shall also strive to continue to improve its
respective levels of environmental protection.

ARTICLE 3
Multilateral Environmental Agreements

1. The Parties recognise that multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs) play an
important role globally and domestically in protecting the environment. The Parties
further recognise that this Chapter can contribute to realising the goals of such
agreements.

2. The Parties strive to consult and cooperate as appropriate with respect to MEAs
to which both Parties are party, on trade-related environmental issues of mutual
interest.

ARTICLE 4
Enforcement of Environmental Measures Including Laws and Regulations

1. A Party shall not fail to effectively enforce its environmental measures including
laws and regulations, through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction, in
a manner affecting trade or investment between the Parties.

2. The Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage trade or investment by
weakening or reducing the protections afforded in its environmental laws, regulations,
policies and practices. Accordingly, neither Party shall waive or otherwise derogate
from such laws, regulations, policies and practices in a manner that weakens or
reduces the protections afforded in those laws, regulations, policies and practices.

3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to empower a Party’s authorities to
undertake environmental law enforcement activities in the territory of the other Party.

ARTICLE 5
Bilateral Cooperation

Recognising the importance of cooperation on environmental issues in achieving the
goals of sustainable development, the Parties commit to implementing cooperation
through existing bilateral agreements, such as the Memorandum of Understanding on
Environmental Cooperation between the Ministry of the Environment and Water
Resources of the Republic of Singapore and the Ministry of Ecology and Environment
of the People’s Republic of China signed on 12 November 2018, and to enhancing
cooperation in areas of common interest as appropriate.

ARTICLE 6
Institutional Arrangement

Each Party shall designate an office within its administration which shall serve as a
contact point with the other Party for the purposes of promoting communication for the
implementation of this Chapter.

ARTICLE 7
Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Neither Party shall have recourse to Chapter 12 (Dispute Settlement) for any matter
arising under this Chapter.

CHAPTER 18 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES 
Article 1 
Definitions 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
(a) cost-oriented means based on cost, and may include a reasonable profit,  and may involve different cost methodologies for different facilities or  services; 
(b) end user means a subscriber to or a final consumer of public  telecommunications networks or services, including a service supplier other  than a supplier of public telecommunications networks or services; 
(c) essential facilities means facilities of a public telecommunications network  or service that: 
(i) are exclusively or predominantly provided by a single or limited  number of suppliers; and 
(ii) cannot feasibly be economically or technically substituted in order to  provide a service; 
(d) interconnection means linking with suppliers providing public  telecommunications networks or services in order to allow the users of one  supplier to communicate with users of another supplier and to access  services provided by another supplier; 
(e) international mobile roaming service means a commercial mobile  service provided pursuant to a commercial agreement between suppliers  of public telecommunications networks or services that enables end users  to use their home mobile handset or other device for voice, data, or 
36 
messaging services while outside the territory in which the end user’s home  public telecommunications network is located; 
(f) leased circuits means telecommunications facilities between two or more  designated points that are set aside for the dedicated use of, or availability  to, particular users, regardless of the technology used to establish the said  telecommunications facilities; 
(g) licence means any authorisation that a Party may require of a person, in  accordance with its laws and regulations, in order for such a person to offer  a telecommunications network or service, including concessions, permits,  or registrations;  
(h) major supplier means a supplier of public telecommunications networks  or services that has the ability to materially affect the terms of participation,  having regard to price and supply, in the relevant market for public  telecommunications networks or services as a result of: 
(i) control over essential facilities; or 
(ii) use of its position in the market; 
(i) non-discriminatory means treatment no less favourable than that  accorded to any other user of like public telecommunications networks or  services in like circumstances; 
(j) number portability means the ability of an end user of public  telecommunications services to retain the same telephone numbers when  switching between the same category of suppliers of public  telecommunications services; 
(k) physical co-location means access to space in order to install, maintain,  or repair equipment at premises owned or controlled and used by a major  supplier to supply public telecommunications services; 
(l) public telecommunications network means public telecommunications  infrastructure used to provide public telecommunications services between  and among defined network termination points; 
(m) public telecommunications service means any telecommunications  service required, explicitly or in effect, by a Party to be offered to the public  generally. Such services may include telegraph, telephone, telex, and data  transmission typically involving the real-time transmission of customer-
37 
supplied information between two or more defined points without any end to-end change in the form or content of the customer's information; 
(n) reference interconnection offer means an interconnection offer extended  by a major supplier and filed with, approved by or determined by a  telecommunications regulatory body that sufficiently details the terms, rates  and conditions for interconnection so that a supplier of public  telecommunications services that is willing to accept it may obtain  interconnection with the major supplier on that basis, without having to  engage in negotiations with the major supplier concerned; 
(o) telecommunications means the transmission and reception of signals by  any electromagnetic means; 
(p) telecommunications regulatory body means any body or bodies  responsible under the laws and regulations of a Party for the regulation of  telecommunications; 
(q) user means an end user or a supplier of public telecommunications  networks or services; and 
(r) virtual co-location means an arrangement whereby a requesting supplier  that seeks co-location may specify equipment to be used in the premises  of a major supplier but does not obtain physical access to those premises  and allows the major supplier to install, maintain and repair that equipment. 
Article 2 
Scope 
1. This Chapter shall apply to measures by a Party affecting trade in public  telecommunications services, including: 
(a) measures relating to access to and use of public telecommunications  networks or services; and 
(b) measures relating to obligations regarding suppliers of public  telecommunications networks or services.
38 
2. This Chapter shall not apply to any measure affecting broadcast or cable  distribution of radio or television programming, except that paragraph 1 of Article 4  (Access and Use) shall apply with respect to a cable or broadcast service supplier’s  access to and use of public telecommunications services. 
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to: 
(a) require a Party to authorise a service supplier of another Party to establish,  construct, acquire, lease, operate, or supply telecommunications networks  or services, other than the former Party’s commitments under Chapter 8  (Cross-Border Trade in Services); or 
(b) require a Party, or require a Party to oblige a service supplier under its  jurisdiction, to establish, construct, acquire, lease, operate, or supply  telecommunications networks or services not offered to the public generally. 
Article 3 
Approaches to Regulation 
1. The Parties recognise the value of competitive markets to deliver a wide choice  in the supply of telecommunications services and to enhance consumer welfare, and  that regulation may not be needed if there is effective competition or if a service is new  to a market. Accordingly, the Parties recognise that regulatory needs and approaches  differ market by market, and that each Party may determine how to implement its  obligations under this Chapter. 
2. In this respect, the Parties recognise that a Party may: 
(a) engage in direct regulation either in anticipation of an issue that the Party  expects may arise or to resolve an issue that has already arisen in the  market; or 
(b) rely on the role of market forces, particularly with respect to market  segments that are, or are likely to be, competitive or that have low barriers  to entry, such as services provided by suppliers of telecommunications  services that do not own network facilities. 
3. For greater certainty, a Party that refrains from engaging in regulation in  accordance with this Article remains subject to the obligations under this Chapter.
39 
Article 4 
Access and Use11 
1. Each Party shall ensure that any service supplier of the other Party has access  to and use of any public telecommunications networks and services, including leased  circuits, offered in its territory or across its borders on a timely basis, and on terms and conditions that are reasonable, non-discriminatory and transparent, inter alia, through  paragraphs 2 through 6. 
2. Subject to paragraphs 5 and 6, each Party shall ensure that service suppliers of  the other Party are permitted to: 
(a) purchase or lease and attach terminal or other equipment which interfaces  with a public telecommunications network and which is necessary to supply  their services; 
(b) connect leased or owned circuits with public telecommunications networks  and services or with circuits leased or owned by another service supplier;  and 
(c) use operating protocols of their choice. 
3. Each Party shall ensure that service suppliers of the other Party may use public  telecommunications networks and services for the movement of information in its  territory or across its borders, including for intra-corporate communications of such  service suppliers, and for access to information contained in data bases or otherwise  stored in machine-readable form in the territory of any Party. 
4. Notwithstanding paragraph 3, a Party may take measures that are necessary to  ensure the security and confidentiality of messages and to protect the personal  information of end users of public telecommunications networks or services, provided  that such measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of  arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade in services. 
11 For greater certainty, this Article does not prohibit any Party from requiring a service supplier to obtain  a licence to supply a public telecommunications network or service in its territory.
40 
5. Each Party shall ensure that no condition is imposed on access to and use of  public telecommunications networks and services, other than as necessary to: 
(a) safeguard the public service responsibilities of suppliers of public  telecommunications networks and services, in particular their ability to  make their networks or services available to the public generally; or 
(b) protect the technical integrity of public telecommunications networks or  services. 
6. Provided that they satisfy the criteria set out in paragraph 5, conditions for access  to and use of public telecommunications networks and services may include: 
(a) a requirement to use specified technical interfaces, including interface  protocols, for connection with public telecommunications networks and  services; 
(b) a requirement, where necessary, for the inter-operability of public  telecommunications networks and services and to encourage the  achievement of the goals set out in Article 17 (Relation to International  Organisations); 
(c) type approval of terminal or other equipment which interfaces with public  telecommunications networks and technical requirements relating to the  attachment of such equipment to public telecommunications networks; 
(d) a restriction on connection of leased or owned circuits with public  telecommunications networks or services or with circuits leased or owned  by other service suppliers; or 
(e) a requirement for notification and licensing. 
Article 5 
Number Portability 
Each Party shall ensure that a supplier of public telecommunications services in its  territory provides number portability for mobile services, to the extent technically and  economically feasible, on a timely basis, and on terms and conditions that are  reasonable and non-discriminatory.
41 
42
Article 6 
Competitive Safeguards 
1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain appropriate measures for the purpose of  preventing suppliers who, alone or together, are a major supplier, from engaging in or  continuing anti-competitive practices. 
2. The anti-competitive practices referred to in paragraph 1 shall include, in  particular: 
(a) engaging in anti-competitive cross-subsidisation; 
(b) using information obtained from competitors with anti-competitive results;  and 
(c) not making available to other suppliers of public telecommunications  networks or services, on a timely basis, technical information about  essential facilities and commercially relevant information which are  necessary for them to provide services. 
Article 7 
Treatment by Major Suppliers 
Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory accords to suppliers of  public telecommunications networks or services of the other Party treatment no less  favourable than that such major supplier accords in like circumstances to its  subsidiaries and affiliates, or non-affiliated service suppliers, regarding: 
(a) the availability, provisioning, rates or quality of like public  telecommunications services; and 
(b) the availability of technical interfaces necessary for interconnection. 
Article 8 
Resale
43 
1. Neither Party shall prohibit the resale of public telecommunications services. 
2. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory: 
(a) offers for resale, at reasonable rates,2 2 to suppliers of public  telecommunications services of another Party, public telecommunications  services that the major supplier provides at retail to end users; and 
(b) does not impose unreasonable or discriminatory conditions or limitations on  the resale of those services.33 
3. Each Party may determine, in accordance with its laws and regulations, which  public telecommunications services must be offered for resale by a major supplier  pursuant to paragraph 2, based on the need to promote competition or to benefit the  long-term interests of end users.  
4. If a Party does not require that a major supplier offer a specific public  telecommunications service for resale, it nonetheless shall allow service suppliers to  request that the service be offered for resale consistent with paragraph 2, without  prejudice to the Party’s decision on the request. 
Article 9 
Interconnection44 
Obligations relating to suppliers of public telecommunications networks or  
22 For the purposes of this Article, each Party may determine reasonable rates through any methodology  it considers appropriate. 
33 Where provided in its laws or regulations, a Party may prohibit a reseller that obtains, at wholesale  rates, a public telecommunications service available at retail to only a limited category of subscribers  from offering the service to a different category of subscribers. 
44 For greater certainty, the term “interconnection”, as used in this Chapter, does not include access to  unbundled network elements.
44 
services  
1. Each Party shall ensure that a supplier of public telecommunications networks  or services in its territory provides interconnection with the suppliers of public  telecommunications networks or services of the other Party. 
2. Each Party shall ensure that a supplier of public telecommunications networks  or services in its territory take reasonable steps to protect the confidentiality of  commercially sensitive or confidential information of, or relating to, users acquired as  a result of interconnection arrangements and that those suppliers only use that  information for the purpose of providing these services. 
Obligations relating to major suppliers 
3. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides  interconnection for the facilities and equipment of suppliers of public  telecommunications networks and services of the other Party at any technically  feasible point in the major supplier’s network. Such interconnection shall be provided: 
(a) under non-discriminatory terms, conditions (including technical standards  and specifications) and rates;55 
(b) of a quality no less favourable than that provided by the major supplier for  its own like services, for like services of non-affiliated service suppliers, or  for its subsidiaries or other affiliates; 
(c) on a timely basis, and on terms and conditions (including technical  standards and specifications) and at cost-oriented rates that are  transparent, reasonable, having regard to economic feasibility, and  sufficiently unbundled so that the supplier of public telecommunications  networks or services of the other Party need not pay for network  components or facilities that it does not require for the services to be  provided; and  
55 For greater certainty, interconnection rates may be commercially negotiated between suppliers of  public telecommunications networks or services.
45 
(d) upon request, at points in addition to the network termination points offered  to the majority of suppliers of public telecommunications networks and  services, subject to charges that reflect the cost of construction of  necessary additional facilities. 
4. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides suppliers of  public telecommunications services of the other Party with the opportunity to  interconnect their facilities and equipment with those of the major supplier through at  least one of the following options: 
(a) a reference interconnection offer or any other interconnection offer  containing the rates, terms and conditions that the major supplier offers  generally to suppliers of public telecommunications services; 
(b) the terms and conditions of an interconnection agreement that is in effect;  or 
(c) a new interconnection agreement through commercial negotiation. 
5. Each Party shall ensure that the procedures applicable for interconnection to a  major supplier are made publicly available. 
6. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory makes publicly  available either its interconnection agreements or reference interconnection offer or  any interconnection offer. 
Article 10 
Provisioning and Pricing of Leased Circuit Services 
Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides suppliers of public  telecommunications networks or services of the other Party with leased circuit services  that are public telecommunications services, on a timely basis, and on terms and  conditions and at rates that are reasonable, non-discriminatory and transparent.
46 
Article 11 
Co-location 
1. Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier which has control over essential  facilities in its territory provides suppliers of public telecommunications networks or  services of the other Party physical co-location of their equipment necessary for  interconnection on a timely basis, and on terms and conditions (including technical  feasibility and space availability where applicable) and at rates that are reasonable,  non-discriminatory and transparent. 
2. Where physical co-location is not practical for technical reasons or because of  space limitations, each Party shall endeavour to ensure that a major supplier in its  territory provides an alternative solution such as facilitating virtual co-location, based  on a generally available offer, on a timely basis, and on terms and conditions and at  rates that are reasonable, non-discriminatory and transparent. 
3. A Party may determine, in accordance with its laws and regulations, which  premises owned or controlled by major suppliers in its territory are subject to  paragraphs 1 and 2, having regard to factors such as the state of competition in the  market where co-location is required, and whether such premises can feasibly be  economically or technically substituted in order to provide a competing service. 
4. If a Party does not require that a major supplier offer co-location at certain  premises, it nonetheless shall allow service suppliers to request that those premises  be offered for co-location consistent with paragraph 1, without prejudice to the Party’s  decision on such a request. 
Article 12 
Independent Telecommunications Regulatory Body 
1. Each Party shall ensure that its telecommunications regulatory body is separate  from, and not accountable to, any supplier of public telecommunications services. 
2. Each Party shall ensure that the regulatory decisions of, and the procedures used  by, its telecommunications regulatory body are impartial with respect to all market  participants.
47 
3. No Party shall accord more favourable treatment to a supplier of  telecommunications services in its territory than that accorded to a like service supplier  of the other Party on the basis that the supplier receiving more favourable treatment  is owned by the national government of the Party. 
Article 13 
Universal Service 
Each Party has the right to define the kind of universal service obligations it wishes to  maintain. Such obligations shall not be regarded as anti-competitive per se, provided  that they are administered in a transparent, non-discriminatory, and competitively  neutral manner, and are not more burdensome than necessary for the kind of universal  service defined by the Party. 
Article 14 
Licensing 
1. Where a licence is required for the supply of public telecommunications networks  or services, the Party shall ensure the public availability of: 
(a) all the licensing criteria and procedures that it applies;66 
(b) the period of time normally required to reach a decision concerning an  application for a licence; and 
(c) the general terms and conditions of a licence. 
2. The Party shall notify an applicant of the outcome of its application without undue  delay after a decision has been taken. 
3. The Party shall ensure that, upon request, an applicant or a licensee is provided  with the reasons for the: 
66 For greater certainty, this sub-paragraph includes any fee for applying for or obtaining a licence.
48 
(a) denial of a licence; 
(b) imposition of supplier-specific conditions on a licence; 
(c) refusal to renew a licence; or 
(d) revocation of a licence. 
Article 15 
Allocation and Use of Scarce Resources 
1. Each Party shall administer its procedures for the allocation and use of scarce  resources related to telecommunications, including frequencies and numbers, in an  objective, timely, transparent and non-discriminatory manner. 
Spectrum 
2. Each Party shall make publicly available the current state of allocated frequency  bands, but shall not be required to provide detailed identification of frequencies  allocated for specific government uses. 
3. For greater certainty, a Party’s measures allocating and assigning spectrum and  managing frequency are not measures that are per se inconsistent with Article 3  (Market Access) of Chapter 8 (Cross-Border Trade in Services). Accordingly, each  Party retains the right to establish and apply spectrum and frequency management  policies that may have the effect of limiting the number of suppliers of public  telecommunications networks or services, provided that the Party does so in a manner  consistent with other provisions of this Agreement. Such right includes the ability to  allocate frequency bands, taking into account current and future needs and spectrum  availability. 
4. When making a spectrum allocation for commercial telecommunications services,  each Party shall endeavour to rely on an open and transparent process that considers  the public interest, including the promotion of competition. Each Party shall endeavour  to rely generally on market-based approaches in assigning spectrum for terrestrial  commercial telecommunications services, if appropriate. In this regard, each Party 
49 
may use mechanisms such as auctions, administrative incentive pricing, or unlicensed  use, if appropriate, to assign spectrum for commercial use. 
Numbers 
5. Each Party shall ensure that a supplier of public telecommunications networks  or services of the other Party established in the territory of the former Party is afforded  access to telephone numbers in a non-discriminatory manner. 
Article 16 
Transparency 
1. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that when its telecommunications  regulatory body seeks input77on a proposal for a law or regulation, that body will: 
(a) make the proposal public or otherwise available to any interested persons; (b) include an explanation of the purpose of and reasons for the proposal; 
(c) provide interested persons with adequate public notice of the ability to  comment and reasonable opportunity for such comment; and 
(d) to the extent practicable, make publicly available all relevant comments filed  with it. 
2. Each Party shall ensure that its measures relating to public telecommunications  services are made publicly available, including: 
(a) tariffs and other terms and conditions of service; 
(b) specifications of technical interfaces with such networks and services; 
(c) information on bodies responsible for the preparation, amendment, and  adoption of standards affecting such access and use; 
77 For greater certainty, seeking input does not include internal governmental deliberations.
50 
(d) conditions for attaching terminal or other equipment to the public  telecommunications network; 
(e) requirements for notification or licensing if any; and 
(f) general procedures relating to resolution of telecommunications disputes  provided for in Article 24 (Resolution of Telecommunications Disputes). 
Article 17 
Relation to International Organisations 
The Parties recognise the importance of international standards for global compatibility  and inter-operability of telecommunications networks and services and undertake to  promote such standards through the work of relevant international bodies, including  the International Telecommunication Union and the International Organisation for  Standardisation. 
Article 18 
International Submarine Cable Systems 
Where a Party has authorised a supplier of public telecommunications networks or  services in its territory to operate an international submarine cable system as a public  telecommunications network or service, that Party shall ensure that such supplier  accords the suppliers of public telecommunications networks or services of the other  Party reasonable and non-discriminatory treatment for access to the international  submarine cable system.8, 98, 9 
88 For greater certainty, a Party may determine the point at which access to the international submarine  cable system is to be provided. 
9 9 For greater certainty, this Article does not prohibit a Party from requiring a supplier of public  telecommunications networks or services to comply with relevant measures including licensing 
51 
Article 19 
Unbundling of Network Elements 
Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that a major supplier in its territory offers access  to network elements on an unbundled basis on terms and conditions that are  reasonable, non-discriminatory and transparent for the supply of public  telecommunications services. Each Party may determine the network elements  required to be made available in its territory, and the suppliers that may obtain those  elements, in accordance with its laws and regulations.1010 
Article 20 
Access to Poles, Ducts, and Conduits 
1. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides  access to poles, ducts, conduits, or any other structures as determined by the Party,  owned or controlled by the major supplier, to suppliers of public telecommunications  services of the other Party in the Party’s territory, on a timely basis, and on terms and  conditions and at rates that are reasonable, non-discriminatory and transparent,  subject to technical feasibility. 
2. A Party may determine, in accordance with its laws and regulations, the poles,  ducts, conduits, or any other structures to which it requires major suppliers in its  territory to provide access in accordance with paragraph 1. When the Party makes this  determination, it shall take into account factors such as the competitive effect of lack  of such access, whether such structures can be substituted in an economically or  technically feasible manner in order to provide a competitive service, or other specified  public interest factors. 
requirements, provided that such measures are not used as a means of avoiding the Party’s obligations  under this Article. 
1010 For greater certainty, consistent with Article 3 (Approaches to Regulation), a Party may determine  the manner in which it implements its obligations under this Article.
52 
Article 21 
Flexibility in the Choice of Technology 
1. A Party shall not prevent suppliers of public telecommunications networks or  services from having the flexibility to choose the technologies that they use to supply  their services. 
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a Party may apply a measure that limits the  technologies that a supplier of public telecommunications networks or services may  use to supply its services, provided that the measure is designed to achieve a  legitimate public policy objective and is not prepared, adopted, or applied in a manner  that creates unnecessary obstacles to trade. 
Article 22 
International Mobile Roaming 
1. The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on promoting transparent and  reasonable rates for international mobile roaming services that can help promote the  growth of trade among the Parties and enhance consumer welfare. 
2. A Party may take steps to enhance transparency and competition with respect to  international mobile roaming services, such as: 
(a) ensuring that information regarding retail rates is easily accessible to  consumers; and 
(b) minimising impediments to roaming, whereby consumers when visiting the  territory of a Party from the territory of the other Party can access  telecommunications services using the device of their choice. 
3. The Parties recognise that a Party, where it has the authority to do so, may  choose to promote competition with respect to international mobile roaming rates  including through commercial arrangements, or to adopt or maintain measures  affecting rates for wholesale or retail international roaming services with a view to  ensuring that the rates are reasonable. If a Party considers it appropriate, it may  cooperate on and implement mechanisms with other Parties to facilitate the  implementation of those measures, including by entering into arrangements with those  Parties. 
53 
4. If a Party (hereinafter referred to as “the first Party” in this paragraph) chooses to  regulate rates or conditions for wholesale or retail international mobile roaming  services, it shall ensure that a supplier of public telecommunications services of the  other Party (hereinafter referred to as “the second Party” in this paragraph) has access  to the regulated rates or conditions for wholesale or retail international mobile roaming  services for its customers roaming in the territory of the first Party if the second Party  has entered into an arrangement with the first Party to reciprocally regulate rates or  conditions for wholesale or retail international mobile roaming services for suppliers of  the two Parties.11 The first Party may require suppliers of the second Party to fully  utilise commercial negotiations to reach agreement on the terms for accessing such  rates or conditions. 
5. A Party that ensures access to regulated rates or conditions for wholesale or  retail international mobile roaming services in accordance with paragraph 4, shall be  deemed to be in compliance with Article 5 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) of  Chapter 8 (Cross-Border Trade in Services), Article 4 (Access and Use), and Article 7  (Treatment by Major Suppliers), with respect to international mobile roaming services. 
6. Nothing in this Article shall require a Party to regulate rates or conditions for  international mobile roaming services. 
11 For greater certainty: 
(a) no Party shall, solely on the basis of any obligations owed to it by the first Party under a  most-favoured-nation provision, or under a telecommunications-specific non-discrimination  provision, in any international trade agreement, seek or obtain for its suppliers the access to  regulated rates or conditions for wholesale or retail international mobile roaming services that  is provided under this Article.  
(b) access to the rates or conditions regulated by the first Party shall be available to a supplier  of the second Party only if the regulated rates or conditions are reasonably comparable to those  reciprocally regulated under the arrangement. The telecommunications regulatory body of the  first Party shall, in the case of a disagreement, determine whether the rates or conditions are  reasonably comparable. For the purposes of this footnote, “rates or conditions that are  reasonably comparable” means rates or conditions agreed to be such by the relevant suppliers  or, in the case of a disagreement, determined to be such by the telecommunications regulatory  body of the first Party.
54 
Article 23 
Cooperation 
1. The Parties may agree to cooperate by:  
(a) sharing information, experiences, and best practices on addressing  challenges relating to the development of the telecommunications industry,  taking into account, among other things, key advancements in emerging  technologies and industry trends; and 
(b) promoting collaboration between a Party and companies and businesses  of the other Party, including their small and medium enterprises, as well as  among the Parties’ respective companies and businesses, including their  small and medium enterprises, to support innovation and the development  of their respective telecommunications industries.  
2. The Parties will endeavour to cooperate in ways that build on, but do not  duplicate, existing cooperation initiatives already being pursued by the Parties  bilaterally or in international fora. Such cooperation may include, in particular,  measures to facilitate industry participation by enterprises of one Party in pilot projects  initiated by the other Party, with the objective of driving digital transformation and  innovation in the telecommunications sector. 
Article 24 
Resolution of Telecommunications Disputes 
1. Each Party shall ensure that a supplier of public telecommunications networks  or services of the other Party may have timely recourse to its telecommunications  regulatory body or dispute resolution body to resolve disputes arising under this Chapter in accordance with its laws and regulations. 
2. Each Party shall ensure that any supplier of public telecommunications networks  or services aggrieved by a final determination or decision of its relevant  telecommunications regulatory body may obtain a review of such determination or  decision in accordance with its laws and regulations.
55 
3. No Party shall permit the making of an application for review to constitute  grounds for non-compliance with the determination or decision of its  telecommunications regulatory body, unless its relevant body determines otherwise.