RECOGNISING the importance of enhancing the longstanding and strong
friendship between the Parties;

ACKNOWLEDGING the mutual desire of the Parties for a comprehensive
economic partnership covering trade in goods, trade in services, investments, and
trade-related areas;

REAFFIRMING the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic
Cooperation between the Eurasian Economic Union and its Member States, of
the one part, and the Republic of Singapore, of the other part, signed in Yerevan,
Armenia on the first day of October 2019;

DESIRING to eliminate barriers to trade in services and investment
between the Parties, lower business costs, enhance economic efficiency and
create favourable conditions for greater economic cooperation and mutual benefit;

RECOGNISING that the promotion and mutual protection of investments
will be conducive to stimulating business initiative and increasing prosperity in
the Parties;

DESIRING to create favourable conditions for greater bilateral economic
cooperation and in particular for investments by investors of a Party in the
territory of the other Party based on the principles of equality and mutual benefit;
and

REAFFIRMING each Party’s right to adopt and enforce measures
necessary to pursue legitimate national policy objectives,

HAVE AGREED as follows:

CHAPTER 1
INITIAL PROVISIONS

Article 1.1
Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties hereby establish a free trade area, consistent with Article V of
the GATS.

Article 1.2
Objectives

The objectives of this Agreement are to liberalise and facilitate trade in
services and investment between the Parties in accordance with this Agreement.

Article 1.3
Scope

1. This Agreement shall apply to measures by the Parties affecting
trade in services and investment.

2. This Agreement shall not impose any obligation on a Party with
respect to a national of the other Party seeking access to its employment
market or employed on a permanent basis in its territory, and does not
confer any right on that national with respect to that access or
employment, nor shall it apply to measures regarding citizenship,
residence or employment on a permanent basis.

3. This Agreement shall not apply to:

(a) services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority
within the territory of each respective Party. For the
purposes of this Agreement, a service supplied in the
exercise of governmental authority means any service,
which is supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in
competition with one or more service suppliers;

(b)
(c)

government procurement; and

subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including
government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance, or
any conditions attached to the receipt or continued receipt
of such subsidies or grants, whether or not such subsidies or
grants are offered exclusively to domestic services, service
consumers or service suppliers, or to investors of the Party
or investments of investors of the Party, including
government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance.

Article 1.4
Definitions of General Application

For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:

(a)

(b)

(c)

“activities” means activities of industrial, commercial or
professional character of the juridical persons, branches, referred to
in subparagraph (1), except for those carried out neither on a
commercial basis nor in competition with one or more persons
engaged in the same type of activities;

“commercial presence” means any type of business or professional
establishment, including through:

(1) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical
person; or

(ii) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative
office,

within the territory of the other Party for the purposes of supplying
a service;

“day” means a calendar day;

(d)

(e)
(f)

(g)

“GATS” means the General Agreement on Trade in Services
contained in Annex 1B of the WTO Agreement;

“IMF” means the International Monetary Fund;

“interested person” means any natural person or juridical person
that may be subject to any rights or obligations under a measure of
general application;

“investment” means every kind of asset, owned or controlled,
directly or indirectly, by an investor, that has the characteristics of
an investment.' Forms that an investment may take include but are
not limited to:?

(1) movable and immovable property and related property rights;

(41) shares, stock, and other forms of equity participation in a
juridical person including rights derived therefrom;

(iii) bonds, debentures, and loans and other debt instruments, >
including rights derived therefrom;

(iv) futures, options, and other derivatives;

(v) claims to money or to any contractual performance related to
a business and having an economic value;

(vi) intellectual property rights and goodwill; and

(vii) licenses, authorisations, permits, and similar rights conferred
pursuant to applicable laws and regulations, including any

' Where an asset lacks the characteristics of an investment, that asset is not an investment
regardless of the form it may take.

> The term “investment” does not include an order or judgement entered in a judicial or
administrative action.

3 For the purposes of this Agreement, “loans and other debt instruments” described in
subparagraph (g)(1i1) and “claims to money or to any contractual performance” described in
subparagraph (g)(v) refer to assets which relate to a business activity and do not refer to assets
which are of a personal nature, unrelated to any business activity.

(h)

(j)

(k)

(I)

concession to search for, cultivate, extract or exploit natural
resources;

“investor of a Party” means:

(1) a natural person who 1s a citizen of that Party in accordance
with its laws and regulations; or

(11) a juridical person of that Party,

that is making or has made an investment, or has taken concrete action
or actions to make an investment,‘ in the territory of the other Party;

“juridical person” means any legal entity duly constituted or
otherwise organised in accordance with the laws and regulations of
a Party, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately or
governmentally owned or controlled, including a corporation, trust,
partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, association, or similar
organisation and a branch of a juridical person;>

“juridical person of a Party” means a juridical person which is
constituted or otherwise organised under the laws and regulations of
that Party;

“measure” means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a
law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action or

any other form;

“measure by a Party” means measures taken by:

* For greater certainty, concrete action or actions to make an investment include actions such
as channelling resources or capital in order to set up a business.

> The inclusion of a “branch” in the definition of “juridical person” is without prejudice to a
Party’s ability to treat a branch under its laws and regulations as an entity that has no
independent legal existence and is not separately organised.

For Kazakhstan, the representative offices of juridical persons of Singapore or any other
country and non-governmental organisations are not allowed to provide services on a
commercial basis on the territory of Kazakhstan.

(m)

(n)

(0)

(p)

(q)

(i) central, regional or local governments and authorities of that
Party; and

(11) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated
by central, regional or local governments or authorities of that
Party;

“measures by a Party affecting trade in services” include
measures in respect of:

(i) the purchase, payment or use of a service;

(11) the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a
service, services which are required by the Parties to be
offered to the public generally; and

(111) the presence, including commercial presence, of persons of a
Party for the supply of a service in the territory of another
Party;

“measure of general application” does not include:

(i) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or quasi-
judicial proceeding that applies to a particular person, good or

service in a specific case; or

(ii) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or
practice;

“national” means a citizen of a Party within the meaning of its laws
and regulations;

“natural person” means a natural person who is a national of a
Party;

“non-party” means a State which is not a party to this Agreement;

(s)

(t)
(u)

(v)

(w)

“person” means either a natural person or a juridical person;

“services” includes any services in any sector except services
supplied in the exercise of governmental authority;

“service supplier” means any person that supplies a service;

6

“service consumer” means any person that receives or uses a

Service;

“supply of a service” includes the production, distribution,
marketing, sale and delivery of a service;

“territory” means:

(1)

(il)

with respect to Kazakhstan: the territory within its land, sea
and air borders, including the land, internal waters, subsoils,
and air space, and any area outside the state border where
Kazakhstan exercises or may hereafter exercise its sovereign
rights and jurisdiction with respect to the sea-bed, subsoil and
their natural resources, in accordance with its laws and
regulations and international law;

with respect to Singapore, its land territory, internal waters
and territorial sea, including the airspace above them, as well
as any maritime area situated beyond the territorial sea which
has been or might in the future be designated under its laws
and regulations, in accordance with international law, as an
area within which Singapore may exercise sovereign rights or
jurisdiction with regards to the sea, the sea-bed, the subsoil
and the natural resources;

° Where the service is not supplied directly by a juridical person but through other forms of
commercial presence such as a branch or a representative office, the service supplier (1.e. the
juridical person) shall, nonetheless, through such presence be accorded the treatment provided
for service suppliers under this Agreement. Such treatment shall be extended to the presence
through which the service is supplied and need not be extended to any other parts of the supplier
located outside the territory where the service is supplied.

(x)

(y)

(Z)

“trade in services” means the supply of a service:
(i) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party;

(ii) in the territory of a Party to the service consumer of the other
Party;

(i411) by a service supplier of a Party, through commercial presence
in the territory of the other Party; or

(iv) by a service supplier of a Party, through presence of natural
persons of a Party in the territory of the other Party;

“WTO Agreement” means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing
the World Trade Organization done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994;

and

“WTO” means the World Trade Organization.

CHAPTER 2
TRADE IN SERVICES

Article 2.1
Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures by a Party affecting trade in

services by service suppliers of the other Party.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to air services, including domestic
and international air transportation services, whether scheduled or non-
scheduled, and related services in support of air services.

3. With regard to financial services, as defined in paragraph 5(a) of
the GATS Annex on Financial Services:

(a)

(b)

(c)

this Chapter shall only apply in respect of the sectors
inscribed in each Party’s Schedule of Specific Commitments
under the GATS, subject to any conditions and qualifications
set out therein;

in addition to the provisions of this Chapter, the rights and
obligations of the Parties in respect of financial services
shall also be governed by the provisions of the GATS Annex
on Financial Services, which are hereby incorporated into
this Agreement, mutatis mutandis; and

in the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and
the GATS Annex on Financial Services, this Chapter shall
prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

4. With regard to telecommunications services:

(a)

this Chapter shall only apply in respect of the sectors inscribed in
each Party’s Schedule of Specific Commitments under the GATS,
subject to any conditions and qualifications set out therein;

(b) in addition to the provisions of this Chapter, the rights and
obligations of the Parties in respect of telecommunications services
shall also be governed by the provisions of the GATS Annex on
Telecommunications and the GATS Reference Paper developed in
the Negotiating Group on Basic Telecommunications attached to
each Party’s Schedule of Specific Commitments under the GATS,
which are hereby incorporated into this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis; and

(c) In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and the
GATS Annex on Telecommunications or between this Chapter and
the GATS Reference Paper developed in the Negotiating Group on
Basic Telecommunications attached to each Party’s Schedule of
Specific Commitments under the GATS, this Chapter shall prevail
to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 2.2
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

I. Subject to exceptions that may derive from harmonisation of regulations
based on agreements concluded by a Party with a non-party providing for mutual
recognition in accordance with Article VII of the GATS, and except as provided
in a Party’s Annex on Article II Exemptions to the GATS, with respect to any
measure covered by this Chapter, each Party shall accord immediately and
unconditionally to services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment no
less favourable than that it accords to like services and service suppliers of any
non-party.

2. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be so construed as to prevent a
Party from conferring or according advantages to adjacent countries in order to
facilitate exchanges limited to contiguous frontier zones of services that are both
locally produced and consumed.

3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted as to oblige a Party to provide
to services or service suppliers of the other Party benefits or privileges that the
former Party is providing or will provide in future:

(a)

(b)

(Cc)

(d)

(e)

under any economic or customs union, or free trade area or common
market, including other forms of regional or bilateral cooperation, or
similar international agreements to which either of the Parties is or
may become a party, including investment agreements among them;

under any bilateral investment treaties to which either of the Parties
is or may become a party;

under any international investment agreements between or among
member States of a regional economic community, including
investment agreements between or among member States of a
regional economic community and any one or more non-parties to
that regional economic community;

under any arrangement with a non-party or non-parties in the same
geographical region designed to promote regional cooperation in the
economic, social, labour, industrial or monetary fields; and

on the basis of agreements meant to avoid double taxation, or other
arrangements on taxation issues.

Article 2.3
Market Access

1. With respect to market access through the modes of supply defined in

subparagraph (x) of Article 1.4 (Definitions of General Application), each Party

shall accord services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions

agreed and specified in Annex 2 — 1 (Schedules of Specific Commitments).!

' Tf a Party undertakes a market-access commitment in relation to the supply of a service
through the mode of supply referred to in subparagraph (x)(i) of Article 1.4 (Definitions of
General Application) and if the cross-border movement of capital is an essential part of the
service itself, that Party is thereby committed to allow such movement of capital. If a Party
undertakes a commitment in relation to the supply of a service through a mode of supply
referred to in subparagraph (x)(i11) of Article 1.4 (Definitions of General Application), it is
thereby committed to allow related transfers of capital into its territory.

2. In sectors where market access commitments are undertaken, the measures

which a Party shall not maintain or adopt either on the basis of a regional

subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory, unless otherwise specified in
Annex 2 — 1 (Schedules of Specific Commitments), are defined as:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the form
of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the
requirement of an economic needs test;

limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the
form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs
test;

limitations on the total number of service operations or on the total
quantity of service output expressed in terms of designated
numerical units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an
economic needs test;

limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a particular service sector or that a service supplier may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the supply
of a specific service in the form of numerical quotas or the
requirement of an economic needs test;

measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity or
joint venture through which a service supplier may supply a service;
and

limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value

of individual or aggregate foreign investment.

Article 2.4

? Subparagraph 2(c) shall not cover measures of a Party which limit inputs for the supply of

services.

National Treatment

1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments in Annex
2 — 1 (Schedules of Specific Commitments), and subject to any conditions and
qualifications set out therein, each Party shall accord to services and service
suppliers of the other Party, in respect of all measures affecting the supply of
services, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own like services
and service suppliers.

2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph | by according to services
and service suppliers of the other Party either formally identical treatment or
formally different treatment to that it accords to its own like services and service
suppliers.

3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be
less favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services
or service suppliers of a Party compared to like services or service suppliers of
the other Party.

Article 2.5
Additional Commitments

The Parties may negotiate commitments with respect to measures affecting
trade in services not subject to scheduling under Articles 2.3 (Market Access) and
2.4 (National Treatment), including those regarding qualifications, standards and
licensing matters. Such commitments shall be inscribed in a Party’s Schedule of
Specific Commitments in Annex 2 — 1 (Schedules of Specific Commitments).

Article 2.6
Payments and Transfers

1. Except under the circumstances envisaged in Article 7.6
(Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments), a Party shall not
apply restrictions on international transfers and payments for current
transactions relating to its specific commitments.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of
the Parties as members of the IMF under the Articles of Agreement of
the IMF, including the use of exchange actions which are in conformity
with the Articles of Agreement, provided that a Party shall not impose
restrictions on any capital transactions inconsistently with its
obligations regarding such transactions, except under Article 7.6
(Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments) or at the request
of the IMF.

Article 2.7
Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers

1. Each Party shall ensure that any monopoly supplier of a service in its
territory does not, in the supply of the monopoly service in the relevant market,
act in a manner inconsistent with that Party’s specific commitments.

2. Where a Party’s monopoly supplier competes, either directly or through an
affiliated company, in the supply of a service outside the scope of its monopoly
rights and which is subject to that Party’s specific commitments, the Party shall
ensure that such a supplier does not abuse its monopoly position to act in its
territory in a manner inconsistent with such commitments.

3. If a Party has reason to believe that a monopoly supplier of a service of the
other Party is acting in a manner inconsistent with paragraph | or 2, it may request
the other Party establishing, maintaining or authorising such supplier to provide
specific information concerning the relevant operations.

4. This Article shall also apply to cases of exclusive service suppliers, where
a Party, formally or in effect:

(a) authorises or establishes a small number of service suppliers; and

(b) substantially prevents competition among those suppliers in its
territory.

Article 2.8
Domestic Regulation

l. In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Party shall
ensure that all measures of general application affecting trade in services are
administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial manner.

2. Where a Party requires authorisation for the supply of a service, the Party’s
competent authorities shall, within a reasonable period of time after the
submission of an application considered complete under its laws and regulations,
inform the applicant of the decision concerning the application. At the request of
the applicant, the competent authorities of the Party shall provide, without undue
delay, information concerning the status of the application.

3. With a view to ensuring that measures relating to qualification
requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements do
not constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in services, each Party shall endeavour
to ensure that such measures are:

(a) based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and
the ability to supply the service;

(b) not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the
service; and

(c) in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves a restriction
on the supply of the service.

4. If authorisation is required for the supply of a service in sectors where
specific commitments are undertaken, each Party shall endeavour to ensure that:

(a) its competent authorities provide an indicative timeframe for
processing of an application for a licence;

(b) its competent authorities make a decision on the granting or denial
of a licence without undue delay;

(c) once the indicative timeframe for the processing of an application
has lapsed, on the request of the applicant, its competent authorities
inform the applicant the of status of its application;

(d) in the case of an unsuccessful application, an applicant is permitted,
within reasonable time limits, to resubmit an application.

5. If the results of the negotiations related to paragraph 4 of Article VI of the
GATS (or the results of any similar negotiations undertaken in other multilateral
fora in which both Parties participate) enter into effect, this Article shall be
amended, as appropriate, after consultations between the Parties, to bring those
results into effect under this Agreement.

CHAPTER 3

INVESTMENT

Article 3.1
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(Cc)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

“claimant” means an investor of a Party that is a party to an
investment dispute with the other Party;

“disputing parties” means the claimant and the respondent;
“disputing party” means either the claimant or the respondent;

“freely usable currency” means “freely usable currency” as
determined by the IMF under the Articles of Agreement of the IMF
and any amendments thereto;

“ICSID” means the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes;

“TCSID Additional Facility Rules” means the Rules Governing the
Additional Facility for the Administration of Proceedings by the
Secretariat of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes, as amended and in effect on 10 April 2006;

“ICSID Arbitration Rules” means the Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules), as amended and in
effect on 10 April 2006;

“ICSID Convention” means the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States,
done at Washington on 18 March 1965;

(i)

(j)

(k)

(1)

(m)

“investor of a non-party” shall mean any natural or juridical person
that is not from either Party;

“New York Convention” means the Convention on the Recognition
and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, adopted at the United
Nations in New York on 10 June 1958;

“respondent” means the Party that is a party to an investment
dispute;

“third-party funding” means any funding provided by a natural or
juridical person who is not a party to the dispute but who enters into
an agreement with a disputing party in order to finance part or all of
the cost of the proceedings, either:

(i) in the form of a donation or grant; or

(ii) in return for a remuneration dependent on the outcome of the
proceeding; and

“UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules” means the Arbitration Rules of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, as
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 15 December
1976.

Section A: Investment

Article 3.2
Scope

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party

relating to:

(a)
(b)

investors of the other Party; and

investments of investors of the other Party made in the territory of
the former Party, whether made before or after the entry into force
of this Agreement.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

any taxation measure, except for Articles 3.10 (Expropriation) and
3.12 (Transfers);

services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority within
the territory of the respective Party. For the purposes of this Chapter,
a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means
any service which is supplied neither on a commercial basis, nor in
competition with one or more service suppliers; and

any measures adopted or maintained by a Party affecting trade in
services, regardless of whether the service sector is scheduled in the
Party’s Schedule of Specific Commitments in Annex 2 — 1.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, Articles 3.3 (Promotion and
Protection of Investments), 3.7 (Compensation for Losses), 3.10
(Expropriation), 3.11 (Subrogation), 3.12 (Transfers) and Section B
(Investor-State Dispute Settlement) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to
any measure affecting the supply of a service by a service supplier
of a Party through commercial presence in the territory of the other
Party pursuant to Chapter 2 (Trade in Services), but only to the extent
that any such measures relate to an investment and an obligation
under this Chapter, regardless of whether such a service sector is

scheduled in the Party’s Schedule of Specific Commitments in
Annex 2 — 1 (Schedules of Specific Commitments).

3. This Agreement shall not apply to claims arising out of events which had
occurred! or claims which had been raised prior to the entry into force of this
Agreement.

Article 3.3
Promotion and Protection of Investments

l. Each Party shall encourage and create favourable conditions for investors
of the other Party to make investments in its territory in accordance with its laws
and regulations and general economic policy.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of the other Party fair
and equitable treatment and full protection and security in accordance with
customary international law. The obligation to provide “fair and equitable
treatment” includes the obligation not to deny justice in criminal, civil or
administrative adjudicatory proceedings. The obligation to provide “full
protection and security” requires each Party to provide the level of police
protection required under customary international law. The concepts of “fair and
equitable treatment” and “full protection and security” do not require treatment
in addition to or beyond that which is required under customary international law
and do not create additional substantive rights.

3. A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of this
Agreement, or of a separate international agreement, does not establish that there
has been a breach of this Article.

Article 3.4
Domestic Regulation

I. This Article shall apply to measures of the Parties relating to licensing
requirements and procedures or qualification requirements and procedures that

' For greater certainty, this Agreement shall not bind a Party in relation to an act or fact that
took place or a situation that ceased to exist before the date of entry into force of this Agreement
for that Party.

affect the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of juridical persons in their
territory.

2. This Article shall not apply to:

(a) non-conforming measures adopted or maintained by a Party as set
out by that Party in its Schedules to Annexes 3 — | and 3 — 2 (Non-
Conforming Measures); and

(b) measures by a Party affecting trade in services in its territory by:
(i) an investor of the other Party; or
(11) investments of investors of the other Party,

as defined in subparagraph (m) of Article 1.4 (Definitions of General
Application).

3. Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that measures relating to licensing
requirements and procedures and qualification requirements and procedures are
administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial manner.

4. Where authorisation is required for the constitution, acquisition or
maintenance of a juridical person, the Party’s competent authorities shall, within
a reasonable period of time after the submission of an application considered
complete under its laws and regulations, inform the applicant of the decision
concerning the application. To the extent practicable, the Party’s competent
authorities shall establish an indicative timeframe for the processing of an
application. At the request of the applicant, the Party’s competent authorities shall
provide, without undue delay, information concerning the status of the

application.
Article 3.5
National Treatment
l. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less

favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with

respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct,
operation, and sale or other disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of the other Party
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to
investments in its territory of its own investors with respect to the establishment,
acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other
disposition of investments.

Article 3.6
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

l. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors of any non-
Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management,
conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of the other Party
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to
investments in its territory of investors of any non-Party with respect to the
establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale
or other disposition of investments.

3. For greater certainty, paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not be construed as granting
to investors options or procedures for the settlement of disputes other than those
set out in Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement).

Article 3.7
Compensation for Losses

1. Investors of a Party whose investments in the territory of the other Party
suffer losses owing to war or other armed conflict, a state of national emergency,
revolt, insurrection, riot or any other similar situations in the territory of the latter
Party, shall be accorded by the latter Party treatment, as regards restitution,
indemnification, compensation or other settlement, if any, no less favourable than
that which the latter Party accords to investments of its own investors or
investments of investors of any non-Party, whichever is more favourable, to the

investment of the investor of the former Party. Any resulting compensation shall
be made in freely usable currency and be freely transferable in accordance with
Article 3.12 (Transfers).

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if an investor of a Party, in the situations
referred to in paragraph 1, suffers a loss in the territory of another Party resulting
from:

(a) requisitioning of its investment or part thereof by the latter Party’s
forces or authorities; or

(b) destruction of its investment or part thereof by the latter Party’s
forces or authorities, which was not required by the necessity of the
situation,

the latter Party shall provide the investor restitution, compensation, or both, as
appropriate, for such loss.

Article 3.8
Performance Requirements

The provisions of the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Investment
Measures, under Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement, which are not specifically
mentioned in or modified by this Agreement, shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to
this Agreement.

Article 3.9
Non-Conforming Measures

l. Articles 3.5 (National Treatment) and 3.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment) shall not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party
as set out in its Schedule to Annex 3 — 1 (Non-Conforming
Measures);

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure
referred to in subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a) to the extent that the amendment does not decrease
the conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before the
amendment, with Articles 3.5 (National Treatment) and 3.6 (Most-
Favoured-Nation Treatment).

2. Articles 3.5 (National Treatment) and 3.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment) shall not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with
respect to sectors, subsectors, or activities, as set out in its Schedule to Annex 3
— 2 (Non-Conforming Measures).

3. Neither Party shall, under any measure adopted after the date of entry into
force of this Agreement and covered by its Schedule to Annex 3 — 2 (Non-
Conforming Measures), require an investor of another Party, by reason of its
nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an investment existing at the time the
measure becomes effective.

4. Articles 3.5 (National Treatment) and 3.6 (Most-Favoured-Nation
Treatment) shall not apply to any measure that is an exception to, or derogation
from, a Party’s obligations under the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement (hereinafter
referred to as the “TRIPS Agreement’), as specifically provided for in that

Agreement.
Article 3.10
Expropriation”
I. Neither Party shall nationalise, expropriate or subject to measures having

effect equivalent to nationalisation or expropriation (hereinafter referred to as
“expropriation”) an investment of an investor of the other Party, unless such a
measure is taken on a non-discriminatory basis, for a public purpose, in
accordance with due process of law, and upon payment of compensation in
accordance with this Article.

2. The expropriation shall be accompanied by the payment of prompt,
adequate and effective compensation. Compensation shall be equivalent to the
fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the
expropriation or impending expropriation became public knowledge, whichever
is earlier. Such compensation shall be effectively realisable, freely usable, and
freely transferable in accordance with Article 3.12 (Transfers) and made without
undue delay. The compensation shall include interest at a commercially
reasonable rate for that currency, accrued from the date of expropriation until the
date of payment.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1| and 2, any measure of expropriation relating
to land shall be in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations of the
expropriating Party.

4. Any measure of expropriation or valuation may, at the request of the
investors affected, be reviewed by a judicial or other independent authority of the
Party taking the measure in the manner prescribed by its laws and regulations.

Article 3.10 (Expropriation) is to be interpreted in accordance with Annex 3 — 3
(Expropriation).

5. This Article shall not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted
in relation to intellectual property rights, or to the revocation, limitation, or
creation of intellectual property rights, to the extent that such issuance, revocation,
limitation, or creation is consistent with the TRIPS Agreement.?

Article 3.11
Subrogation

1. If a Party (or any agency, institution, statutory body or corporation
designated by it) makes a payment to its own investors in respect of any of their
claims under this Agreement as a result of an indemnity it has given in respect of
an investment of an investor of the other Party or any part thereof, the other Party
shall acknowledge that the former Party (or any agency, institution, statutory
body or corporation designated by it) is entitled by virtue of subrogation or
transfer of any right or title to exercise the rights and assert the claims of its own
investors. The subrogated or transferred rights or claims shall not be greater than
the original rights or claims of the said investor.

2. Where a Party (or any agency, institution, statutory body or corporation
designated by it) has made a payment to an investor of that Party and has taken
over rights and claims of the investor, that investor shall not, unless authorised to
act on behalf of the Party or the designated agency of the Party making the
payment, pursue those rights and claims against the other Party.

Article 3.12
Transfers

l. Each Party shall permit transfers relating to investments of an investor of
the other Party in its territory to be made freely and without delay into and out of
its territory. Such transfers include:

(a) payments made under a contract entered into by the investor, or its
investment, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;

3 For greater certainty, the term “revocation” of intellectual property rights includes the
cancellation or nullification of such rights, and the term “limitation” of intellectual property
rights includes exceptions to such rights.

(b)

profits, dividends, capital gains, and proceeds from the sale of all or
any part of the investment or from the partial or complete liquidation
of the investment;

(c) interest, royalty payments, management fees, technical assistance
fees and other fees;

(d) payments made pursuant to Article 3.7 (Compensation for Losses)
and Article 3.10 (Expropriation);

(e) contributions to capital, including the initial contribution; and

(f) payments arising under Section B_ (Investor-State Dispute
Settlement).

2. Each Party gives permission on payments and transfers referred to in

paragraph | in a freely usable currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing
at the time of transfer.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may delay or prevent a

transfer through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of

its laws and regulations relating to:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)

bankruptcy, insolvency or the protection of the rights of creditors;

issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options or
derivatives;

financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to
assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;

criminal or penal offences;

ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in adjudicatory
proceedings;

(f) social security, pensions and obligatory savings programmes; or
(g) taxation.

4. The Parties understand that subparagraph 3(d) can apply to measures taken
in accordance with the international standards of the Financial Action Task Force
to prevent money laundering, terrorism and proliferation financing.

5. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of a Party
which is a member of the IMF under its Articles of Agreement, including the use
of exchange actions which are in conformity with the said Articles of Agreement,
provided that a Party shall not impose restrictions on any capital transactions
inconsistently with its obligations under this Chapter regarding such transactions,
except under Article 7.6 (Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments) or
at the request of the IMF.

Article 3.13
Special Formalities and Treatment of Information

1. Nothing in Article 3.5 (National Treatment) shall be construed to prevent
a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities
in connection with an investment, such as a residency requirement for registration
or a requirement that an investment be legally constituted under its laws and
regulations, provided that these formalities do not materially impair the
protections afforded by the Party to investors of the other Party and investments
pursuant to this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding Articles 3.5 (National Treatment) and 3.6 (Most-
Favoured-Nation Treatment), a Party may require an investor of the other Party
or its investment to provide information concerning that investment solely for
informational or statistical purposes. The Party shall protect such information that
is confidential from any disclosure that would prejudice the competitive position
of the investor or the investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to
prevent a Party from otherwise obtaining or disclosing information in connection
with the equitable and good faith application of its laws and regulations.

Section B: Investor-State Dispute Settlement

Article 3.14
Scope

l. This Section shall apply to disputes between a Party and an investor of the
other Party concerning an alleged breach of an obligation of the former under this
Chapter which causes loss or damage to the investor or its investment.

2. This Section shall not apply to any dispute concerning any measure
adopted or maintained or any treatment accorded to investors or investments by
a Party in respect of tobacco or tobacco-related products.*

3. This Section shall not apply to any dispute concerning any matter arising
under Article 3.4 (Domestic Regulation).

Article 3.15
Institution of Arbitral Proceedings

l. The disputing parties shall initially seek to resolve the dispute by
consultations and negotiations.

2. Where the dispute cannot be resolved as provided for under paragraph |
within six (6) months from the date of a written request for consultations and
negotiations, the claimant may submit to arbitration:

(a) acclaim, on its own behalf, that the respondent has breached an
obligation under this Agreement and the claimant has incurred loss
or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach; or

(b) a claim, on behalf of a juridical person of the respondent that is a
juridical person that the claimant owns or controls, either directly

+ For the purposes of this Chapter, “tobacco or tobacco-related products” means products under
Harmonised System Chapter 24 (Tobacco and Manufactured Tobacco Substitutes) and
tobacco-related products falling outside Harmonised System Chapter 24 (Tobacco and
Manufactured Tobacco Substitutes).

> A juridical person is:

(a) owned by natural persons or juridical persons of the other Party if more than 50 per cent of
the equity interest in it is beneficially owned by natural persons or juridical persons of that
Party;

or indirectly, that the respondent has breached an obligation under
this Agreement and the juridical person has incurred loss or damage
by reason of, or arising out of, that breach.

3. A claimant may submit the claim to arbitration:

(a)

under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
provided that both Parties are parties to the ICSID Convention;

(b) under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that one of the
Parties, but not both, is a party to the ICSID Convention;
(c) under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; or
(d) to any other arbitral institutions or under any other arbitration rules,
if the disputing parties so agree.
4. Each Party hereby consents to the submission of a dispute to arbitration

under paragraphs 3(a), 3(b) and 3(c) in accordance with the provisions of this
Section, conditional upon:

(a)

(b)

(c)

the submission of the dispute to such arbitration taking place within
three years of the time at which the claimant became aware, or
should reasonably have become aware, of a breach of an obligation
under this Agreement causing loss or damage to the claimant or its
investment;

the claimant not being a juridical person of the respondent until the
claimant refers the dispute for arbitration pursuant to paragraph 3;

the claimant providing written consent to arbitration in accordance
with the provisions set out in this Section; and

(b) controlled by natural persons or juridical persons of the other Party if such natural persons
or juridical persons have the power to name a majority of its directors or otherwise to legally
direct its actions.

(d) the claimant providing written notice, which shall be delivered at
least thirty (30) days before the claim is submitted, to the respondent
of its intent to submit the dispute to such arbitration and which:

(1) states the name and address of the claimant and, where a
dispute is submitted on behalf of a juridical person, the name,
address, and place of constitution of the juridical person;

(41) nominates one of the fora referred to in paragraph 3 as the
forum for dispute settlement;

(111) 1s accompanied,

(A) — for claims submitted to arbitration under subparagraph
2(a), by the claimant’s written waiver; and

(B) for claims submitted to arbitration under subparagraph
2(b), by the claimant’s and the juridical person’s
written waivers,

of any right to initiate or continue any proceedings (excluding
proceedings for interim measures of protection referred to in
paragraph 1 of Article 3.20 (Interim Measures of Protection
and Diplomatic Protection) before any of the other dispute
settlement fora referred to in paragraph 3 in relation to the
matter under dispute; and

(iv) briefly summarises the alleged breach of the respondent under
this Agreement (including the provisions alleged to have been
breached), the legal and factual basis for the dispute, and the
loss or damage allegedly caused to the claimant or its
investment by reason of that breach.

5. Upon request of the respondent, the tribunal shall decline jurisdiction
where the claimant fails to respect any of the requirements referred to in
paragraph 4.

6. The consent under paragraph 4 and the submission of a claim to arbitration
under this Section shall satisfy the requirements of:

(a) Chapter I (Jurisdiction of the Centre) of the ICSID Convention and
the ICSID Additional Facility Rules for written consent of the parties
to the dispute; and

(b) Article Il of the New York Convention for an “agreement in
writing”.

7. A claim that is submitted for arbitration under this Section shall be
considered to arise out of a commercial relationship or transaction for the
purposes of Article I of the New York Convention.

Article 3.16
Constitution of Arbitral Tribunal

I. Unless the disputing parties otherwise agree, the arbitral tribunal shall be
composed of three arbitrators. Each disputing party shall appoint one arbitrator
and the disputing parties shall agree upon a third arbitrator, who shall be the
chairman of the arbitral tribunal. If an arbitral tribunal has not been established
within ninety (90) days from the date on which the claim was submitted to
arbitration, either because a disputing party failed to appoint an arbitrator or
because the disputing parties failed to agree upon the chairman, the Secretary-
General of ICSID, upon request of either disputing party, shall appoint, at his own
discretion, the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, in the event that the Secretary-General of
ICSID is a national or permanent resident of either Party, the Deputy Secretary-
General of ICSID or the officer next in seniority who is not a national or
permanent resident of either Party shall be requested to make the necessary
appointment or appointments.

3. The arbitrators shall:

(a) have experience or expertise in public international law or
international investment law; and

(b) be independent from the Parties and the disputing investor, and not
be affiliated to or receive instructions from any of them.

Article 3.17
Rules of Interpretation

The Parties may adopt interpretations of provisions of this Agreement. A
joint decision of the Parties on the interpretation of a provision of this Agreement
shall be binding on the tribunal, and any decision or award issued by the tribunal
must be consistent with that joint decision.

Article 3.18
Place of Arbitration

Unless the disputing parties otherwise agree, the tribunal shall determine
the place of arbitration in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules,
provided that the place shall be in the territory of a State that is a party to the New
York Convention.

Article 3.19
Conduct of the Arbitration

1. A tribunal established under this Section shall decide the issues in dispute
in accordance with this Agreement and the applicable rules and principles of
international law.

2. Without prejudice to a tribunal’s authority to address other objections as a
preliminary question, such as an objection that a dispute is not within the
competence of the tribunal, including an objection to the tribunal’s jurisdiction, a
tribunal shall address and decide as a preliminary question any objection by the
respondent that, as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an
award in favour of the claimant may be made under Article 3.21 (Award).

(a) Such objection shall be submitted to the tribunal as soon as possible
after the tribunal is constituted, and in no event later than the date
the tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its counter-memorial
(or, in the case of an amendment to the notice of arbitration, the date
the tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its response to the
amendment).

(b) On receipt of an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall
suspend any proceedings on the merits, establish a schedule for
considering the objection consistent with any schedule it has
established for considering any other preliminary question, and issue
a decision or award on the objection, stating the grounds therefor.

(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall
assume to be true the claimant’s factual allegations in support of any
claim in the notice of arbitration (or any amendment thereof) and, in
disputes brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the
statement of claim referred to in the relevant article of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The tribunal may also consider any
relevant facts not in dispute.

(d) The respondent shall not waive any objection as to competence or
any argument on the merits merely because the respondent did or did
not raise an objection under this paragraph or make use of the
expedited procedure set out in paragraph 3.

3. In the event that the respondent so requests within forty-five (45) days after
the tribunal is constituted, the tribunal shall decide on an expedited basis an
objection under paragraph 2 or any objection that the dispute is not within the
tribunal’s competence, including an objection that the dispute is not within the
tribunal’s jurisdiction. The tribunal shall suspend any proceedings on the merits
and issue a decision or award on the objection(s), stating the grounds therefor, no
later than one hundred and fifty (150) days after the date of the request. However,
if a disputing party requests a hearing, the tribunal may take an additional thirty
(30) days to issue the decision or award. Regardless of whether a hearing is
requested, a tribunal may, on a showing of extraordinary cause, delay issuing its
decision or award by an additional brief period, which may not exceed thirty (30)
days.

4. When it decides a respondent’s objection under paragraph 2 or 3, the
tribunal may, if warranted, award to the prevailing disputing party reasonable
costs and attorney’s fees incurred in submitting or opposing the objection. In
determining whether such an award is warranted, the tribunal shall consider

whether either the claimant’s claim or the respondent’s objection was frivolous,
and shall provide the disputing parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.

Article 3.20
Interim Measures of Protection and Diplomatic Protection

l. Subparagraph 4(d)(111) of Article 3.15 (Institution of Arbitral Proceedings)
shall not prevent the claimant from seeking interim measures of protection, not
involving the payment of damages or resolution of the substance of the matter in
dispute before the courts or administrative tribunals of the respondent, prior to
the institution of proceedings before any of the dispute settlement fora referred
to in paragraph 3 of Article 3.15 (Institution of Arbitral Proceedings), for the
preservation of its rights and interests.

2. Neither Party shall give diplomatic protection, or bring an international
claim, in respect of a dispute which one of its investors and the other Party shall
have consented to submit or have submitted to arbitration under this Section,
unless such other Party has failed to abide by and comply with the award rendered
in such dispute. Diplomatic protection, for the purposes of this paragraph, shall
not include informal diplomatic exchanges for the sole purpose of facilitating a
settlement of the dispute.

Article 3.21
Award

I. Where a tribunal makes a final award against a respondent, the tribunal
may award, separately or in combination, only:

(a) monetary damages and any applicable interest; and
(b) restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that the
respondent may pay monetary damages and any applicable interest

in lieu of restitution.

A tribunal may also award costs and attorney’s fees in accordance with this
Section and the applicable arbitration rules.

2. Any arbitral award shall be final and binding upon the disputing parties.
Each Party shall ensure the recognition and enforcement of the award in
accordance with its relevant laws and regulations.

3. Where a claim is submitted on behalf of a juridical person of the respondent,
the arbitral award shall be made to the juridical person.

Article 3.22
Costs

1. The tribunal shall order that the costs of the proceedings be borne by the
unsuccessful disputing party. In exceptional circumstances, the tribunal may
apportion costs between the disputing parties if it determines that apportionment
is appropriate in the circumstances of the case.

2. Other reasonable costs, including costs of legal representation and
assistance, shall be borne by the unsuccessful disputing party, unless the tribunal
determines that such apportionment is unreasonable in the circumstances of the
case.

3. If only parts of the claims have been successful, the costs awarded shall be
adjusted, proportionately, to the number or extent of the successful parts of the
claims.

4. Upon request, the tribunal may order the claimant to post security for all
or a part of the costs, if there are reasonable grounds to believe that the claimant
risks not being able to honour a possible decision on costs issued against it.

5. If the security for costs is not posted in full within thirty (30) days after the
tribunal’s order or within any other time period set by the tribunal, the tribunal
shall so inform the disputing parties. The tribunal may order the suspension or
termination of the proceedings.

Article 3.23
Consolidation

l. Where two or more claims have been submitted separately to arbitration
under this Section, and the claims have a question of law or fact in common and
arise out of the same events or circumstances, any disputing party may seek a
consolidation order, in accordance with the agreement of all the disputing parties
sought to be covered by the order or the terms of this Article.

2. A disputing party that seeks a consolidation order under this Article shall
deliver, in writing, a request to the Secretary-General of ICSID and to all the
disputing parties sought to be covered by the order, specifying the name and
address of all the disputing parties sought to be covered by the order; the nature
of the order sought; and the grounds on which the order is sought.

3. Unless the Secretary-General of ICSID finds within thirty (30) days after
receiving a request in conformity with paragraph 2 that the request is manifestly
unfounded, a tribunal shall be established under this Article.

4. Unless all the disputing parties sought to be covered by the consolidation
order otherwise agree, the tribunal established under this Article shall comprise
three arbitrators:

(a) one arbitrator appointed by agreement of the disputing investors;
(b) one arbitrator appointed by the respondent; and

(c) the chairman of the tribunal appointed by the Secretary-General of
ICSID.

5. If, within the sixty (60) days after the Secretary-General receives a request
made under paragraph 2, the respondent Party fails or the disputing investors fail
to appoint an arbitrator in accordance with paragraph 4, the Secretary-General,
on request of any disputing party sought to be covered by the order, shall appoint
the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed.

6. Where a tribunal established under this Article is satisfied that two or more
claims that have been submitted to arbitration in accordance with Article 3.15
(Institution of Arbitral Proceedings), have a question of law or fact in common,
and arise out of the same events or circumstances, the tribunal may, in the interest

of fair and efficient resolution of the claims, and after hearing the disputing parties,
by order:

(a) assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine together, all or part
of the claims;

(b) assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine one or more claims
whose determination it considers would assist in the resolution of the
other claims; or

(c) instruct a tribunal previously established under Article 3.16
(Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal) to assume jurisdiction over
and to hear and determine together all or part of the claims, provided
that:

(i) that tribunal, at the request of any disputing investor, not
previously a disputing party before that tribunal, shall be
reconstituted with its original members, except that the
arbitrator for the disputing investors shall be appointed
pursuant to subparagraph 4(a) and paragraph 5; and

(ii) that tribunal shall decide whether any previous hearing must
be repeated.

7. Where a tribunal has been established under this Article, a disputing
investor that has submitted a claim to arbitration pursuant to Article 3.15
(Institution of Arbitral Proceedings) and that has not been named in a request
made under paragraph 2 may make a written request to the tribunal that it be
included in any order issued under paragraph 6, specifying:

(a) the name and address of the disputing investor;

(b) the nature of the order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the order is sought.

The claimant shall provide the Secretary-General with a copy of his request.

8. A tribunal established pursuant to this Article shall conduct the
proceedings in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, except as
modified by this Section.

9. A tribunal established under Article 3.16 (Constitution of the Arbitral
Tribunal) shall not have jurisdiction to decide a claim or a part of a claim over
which a tribunal established or instructed under this Article has assumed
jurisdiction.

10. On the application of a disputing party, a tribunal established pursuant to
this Article may, pending its decision under paragraph 6, order that the
proceedings of a tribunal established under Article 3.16 (Constitution of the
Arbitral Tribunal) be stayed, unless the latter tribunal has already adjourned its
proceedings.

Article 3.24
Third-Party Funding

1. In the case of third-party funding, the disputing party benefiting from it
shall notify the other disputing party and the Tribunal of the name and address
and, where applicable, the ultimate beneficial owner and corporate structure of
the third-party funder.

2. Such notification shall be made at the time of submission of a claim, or,
when the financing agreement is concluded or the donation or grant is made after
the submission of a claim, immediately after the agreement is concluded or the
donation or grant is made.

3. In apportioning the cost of the proceedings pursuant to Article 3.22 (Costs),
the Tribunal may take into account any third-party funding arrangements,
including whether the requirements provided for in paragraphs | and 2 of this
Article have been respected.

Section C: Final Provisions

Article 3.25

Publication of International Agreements

I. Each Party shall ensure that international agreements pertaining to or
affecting investors or investment activities to which it is a signatory shall be
promptly published or otherwise made available in such a manner as to enable
interested persons or Parties to become acquainted with them.

2. To the extent possible, each Party shall make the international agreements
of the kind referred to in paragraph 1 available on the Internet. Each Party shall,
upon request by the other Party, promptly respond to specific questions from and
provide information to the other Party with respect to the international agreements
referred to in paragraph 1.

CHAPTER 4
MOVEMENT OF NATURAL PERSONS

Article 4.1
Scope

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures affecting temporary entry of
natural persons of a Party into the territory of the other Party with
respect to the categories of such natural persons that are set out in that
other Party’s Schedule in Annex 4 — 1 (Schedule of Commitments for
the Movement of Natural Persons Chapter).

2. This Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons
of a Party seeking access to the employment market of the other Party,
nor shall it apply to measures regarding citizenship, nationality,
residence or employment on a permanent basis.

3. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from applying
measures to regulate the entry of natural persons of the other Party into,
or their temporary stay in, its territory, including those measures
necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly movement
of natural persons across, its borders, provided that such measures are
not applied in such a manner as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing
to the other Party under the terms of a specific commitment. The sole
fact of requiring a visa for natural persons of a Party to this Agreement
and not for those of a non-party shall not be regarded as nullifying or
impairing benefits under the commitments made in this Agreement.

4. For the purposes of this Chapter, “temporary entry” means entry
and stay by a natural person of a Party, without the intent to reside
permanently within the territory of the other Party.

5. Neither Party shall impose or maintain any numerical restriction
or requirement of economic needs test relating to temporary entry of
natural persons referred to in paragraph 1 of this Chapter except as
provided for in its Schedule in Annex 4 — | (Schedule of Commitments
for the Movement of Natural Persons Chapter).

I.

Article 4.2
Provision of Information

For the purposes of this Chapter, each Party shall ensure that its

competent authorities make publicly available such information in such

a manner as will enable natural persons of the other Party to become

acquainted with its measures relating to this Chapter. Such information
shall be kept updated.

2.

Information referred to in paragraph 1 refers to explanatory

material, regarding the requirements for temporary entry under this
Chapter. Such explanatory material shall include, where appropriate:

3.

(a) the relevant laws and regulations;

(b) the categories of permission relating to the temporary entry of
natural persons under this Chapter;

(c) the procedures for the application for, and the grant, extension or
renewal of, such permission, including the documentation required,

conditions to be met and method of filing;

(d) the application fees for each type of permission relating to the
temporary entry of natural persons under this Chapter; and

(e) the indicative processing time for the applications.

Each Party shall provide the other Party with details of relevant

publications or websites where the information referred to in paragraph

2 1s made available no later than six months after the date of entry into

force of this Agreement.

Article 4.3
Expeditious Application Procedures

l. The competent authorities of each Party shall process
expeditiously applications for granting temporary entry from natural
persons of the other Party, including applications for renewals or
extensions thereof.

2. Upon request by the applicant, the competent authorities of a Party
shall provide, without undue delay, information concerning the status
of his or her application.

3. Within a reasonable period of time after an application requesting
temporary entry is considered complete under its laws and regulations,
the competent authorities of each Party shall inform the applicant, either
directly or through his or her prospective employers, of the outcome of
the application. The notification shall include, as appropriate, the
approved period of stay and any other terms and conditions.

4. The Parties shall provide facilities for online application and
processing of the permission for the temporary entry of natural persons
under this Chapter. A Party may require that online applications for
permission be made by the prospective employers of the natural person
concerned.

Article 4.4
Dispute Settlement

Nothing in this Chapter shall be subject to investor-state dispute settlement
pursuant to Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) of Chapter 3
(Investment).

CHAPTER 5
TRANSPARENCY

Article 5.1
Publication

1. Each Party shall ensure that its measures of general application with respect
to any matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published or otherwise
made available in such a manner as to enable the other Party and interested
persons to become acquainted with them.

2. To the extent possible, each Party shall:

(a) publish in advance any such measures of general application that it
proposes to adopt; and

(b) provide interested persons and the other Party with a reasonable
opportunity to comment on such proposed measures.

Article 5.2
Notification and Provision of Information

1. To the maximum extent possible, each Party shall notify the other Party of
any measure which the Party considers may materially affect the operation of this
Agreement or otherwise substantially affect the other Party’s interests under this
Agreement.

2. Upon request of the other Party, a Party shall promptly provide information
and respond to questions pertaining to any measure with respect to any matter
covered by this Agreement, whether or not the requesting Party has been
previously notified of that measure.

3. Any notification or information provided under this Article shall be
without prejudice as to whether the measure is consistent with this Agreement.

4. Any notification, request or information under this Article shall be
provided to the other Party through the relevant contact points.

5. When the information pursuant to paragraph | has been made available by
notification to the WTO in accordance with its relevant rules and procedures or
when the aforementioned information has been made available on the official,
publicly accessible and fee-free websites of the Parties, the information exchange
shall be considered to have taken place.

Article 5.3
Administrative Proceedings

With a view to administering in a consistent, impartial and reasonable
manner all measures of general application with respect to any matter covered by
this Agreement, each Party in its administrative proceedings applying such
measures to particular persons, goods or services of the other Party in specific
cases shall:

(a) when a proceeding is initiated, endeavour to provide persons of the
other Party that are directly affected by a proceeding with reasonable
notice, in accordance with its procedures, including a description of the
nature of the proceeding, a statement of the legal authority under which
the proceeding is initiated and a general description of any issues in
controversy;

(b) afford such persons a reasonable opportunity to present facts and
arguments in support of their positions prior to any final administrative
action, insofar as time, the nature of the proceeding and the public
interest permit; and

(c) ensure that the procedures are in accordance with its laws and
regulations.

Article 5.4
Review of Administrative Actions

l. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial or
administrative tribunals or procedures for the purposes, inter alia, of the prompt
review and correction of administrative actions! relating to matters covered by
this Agreement. Such tribunals or procedures shall be impartial and independent
of the office or authority entrusted with administrative enforcement and shall not
have any substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, in any such tribunals or procedures, the parties
to the proceeding are provided with the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective
positions; and

(b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record or, where
required by its laws and regulations, the record compiled by the
administrative authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided for
in its laws and regulations, that such decision shall be implemented by, and shall
govern the practice of, the office or authority with respect to the administrative
action at issue.

' For greater certainty, the review of administrative actions can take the form of common law
judicial review, and the correction of administrative actions may include a referral back to the
body that took such action for corrective action.

Article 5.5
Specific Provisions

Specific provisions in other Chapters of this Agreement regarding the
subject matter of this Chapter shall prevail to the extent that they differ from this
Chapter.

CHAPTER 6

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Article 6.1
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

“arbitrator” means a member of an arbitration panel established
under Article 6.8 (Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration
Panel);

“arbitration panel” means a panel established under Article 6.8
(Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration Panel);

“complaining Party” means any Party that requests the
establishment of an arbitration panel under Article 6.7 (Initiation of
Arbitration Procedure);

“DSU” means the Understanding on Rules and Procedures
Governing the Settlement of Disputes contained in Annex 2 of the
WTO Agreement;

“Party complained against” means the Party that is alleged to be
in violation of the provisions of this Agreement; and

“proceeding”, unless otherwise specified, means an arbitration
panel proceeding under this Chapter.

Article 6.2
Objective

The objective of this Chapter is to avoid and settle any dispute between the

Parties with a view to arriving at, where possible, a mutually acceptable solution.

Article 6.3

Scope

l. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply
with respect to the avoidance or settlement of all disputes between the Parties
regarding the interpretation or application of the provisions of this Agreement
wherever a Party considers that:

(a) a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with the obligations
under this Agreement; or

(b) the other Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under
this Agreement.

2. For greater certainty, disputes arising from the nullification or impairment
of any benefit that a Party could reasonably have expected to accrue to it under
this Agreement as a result of the application of any measure by the other Party
which is not inconsistent with this Agreement shall not be subject to the
provisions of this Chapter.

Article 6.4
Choice of Forum

1. Recourse to the dispute settlement provisions of this Chapter shall be
without prejudice to any action in the WTO framework, including dispute
settlement proceedings.

2. Where the complaining Party has, with regard to a particular measure,
initiated a dispute settlement proceeding either under this Chapter or under the
WTO Agreement, it shall not institute a dispute settlement proceeding regarding
the same measure in the other forum until the first proceeding has ended.
Moreover, the complaining Party should not initiate dispute settlement
proceedings under this Chapter and under the WTO Agreement, unless
substantially different obligations are in dispute, or unless the forum selected fails
for procedural or jurisdictional reasons to make findings on the claim seeking
redress of that obligation, provided that the failure of the forum is not the result
of a failure of a Party to act diligently.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 2:

(a) dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement are
deemed to be initiated by a Party’s request for the establishment of
a panel under Article 6 of the DSU and are deemed to be ended when
the Dispute Settlement Body (hereinafter referred to as “DSB”)
established in paragraph | of Article 2 of the DSU adopts the Panel’s
report, and the Appellate Body’s report as the case may be, under
Article 16 and paragraph 14 of Article 17 of the DSU; and

(b) dispute settlement proceedings under this Chapter are deemed to be
initiated by a Party’s request for the establishment of an arbitration
panel under Article 6.7 (Initiation of Arbitration Procedure) and are
deemed to be ended when the arbitration panel issues its final report
to the Parties under Article 6.11 (Interim and Final Arbitration Panel
Report) or when arbitration procedures have been terminated under
Article 6.15 (Suspension and Termination of Arbitration Procedures).

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude a Party from implementing the
suspension of obligations authorised by the DSB. The WTO Agreement shall not
be invoked to preclude a Party from suspending obligations as provided for under
this Chapter.

Article 6.5
Consultations

1. The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation and
application of the provisions of this Agreement and to resolve any dispute thereof
by entering into consultations in good faith with the aim of reaching a mutually
agreed solution.

2. A Party shall seek consultations, by means of a written request to the other
Party’s contact point, and shall give the reasons for the request, including
identification of the measures at issue, the applicable provisions of the Agreement
and the reasons for the applicability of such provisions.

3. Consultations shall be held no later than thirty (30) days after the date of
receipt of the request, and shall be deemed concluded sixty (60) days after the
date of receipt of the request, unless the Parties agree otherwise. Consultations on
matters of urgency, including those regarding perishable goods, shall be held no
later than fifteen (15) days after the date of receipt of the request, and shall be
deemed concluded thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of the request, unless
the Parties agree otherwise.

4. Consultations may be held in person or by any technological means
available to the Parties. If consultations are held in person, they shall be held in
the territory of the Party to whom the request was made, unless the Parties agree
otherwise. Consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights
of either Party in any further proceedings.

5. If the Party to whom the request is made does not respond to the request
for consultations within ten (10) days of the date of its receipt, or if consultations
are not held within the timeframes laid down in paragraph 3, or if consultations
have been concluded and no mutually agreed solution has been reached, the
complaining Party may request the establishment of an arbitration panel in
accordance with Article 6.7 (Initiation of Arbitration Procedure).

Article 6.6
Good Offices, Conciliation or Mediation

1. The Parties may at any time agree to good offices, conciliation or mediation.
Procedures for good offices, conciliation or mediation may begin at any time.
They may be terminated at any time upon the request of either Party.

2. If the Parties so agree, good offices, conciliation or mediation may continue
while the proceedings of the arbitration panel provided for in this Chapter are in
progress.

3. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation and mediation, and in
particular positions taken by the Parties during those proceedings, shall be
confidential and without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any other
proceeding.

Article 6.7
Initiation of Arbitration Procedure

A request for the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be made in
writing to the contact point of the Party complained against. The complaining
Party shall identify in its request the specific measure or other matter at issue,
whether consultations have been held and a summary of the legal basis of the
complaint in a manner sufficient to present the problem clearly.

Article 6.8
Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration Panel

I. An arbitration panel shall be composed of three (3) arbitrators. Each Party
shall appoint an arbitrator no later than thirty (30) days after the receipt of the
request referred to in Article 6.7 (Initiation of Arbitration Procedure), and the two
arbitrators shall, no later than thirty (30) days after the appointment of the second
of them, designate by agreement the third arbitrator.

2. The Parties shall, no later than seven (7) days after the designation of the
third arbitrator, approve or disapprove the appointment of that arbitrator, who
shall, if approved, act as the chairperson of the arbitration panel.

3. If the third arbitrator has not been designated as provided under paragraph
1, or either Party disapproves the appointment of the third arbitrator, the Director-

General of the WTO shall, at the request of either Party, within a further period
of thirty (30) days, appoint the third arbitrator, who shall act as the chairperson
of the arbitration panel.

4. If a Party does not appoint an arbitrator as provided under paragraph 1, the
other Party may inform the Director-General of the WTO, who shall appoint the
chairperson of the arbitration panel within a further period of thirty (30) days.
Upon appointment, the chairperson shall request the Party which has not
appointed an arbitrator to do so within fourteen (14) days. If after such period,
that Party has still not appointed an arbitrator, the chairperson shall inform the
Director-General of the WTO, who shall make this appointment within a further
period of thirty (30) days.

5. For the purposes of paragraphs 3 and 4, in the event that the Director-
General of the WTO is a national of Kazakhstan or Singapore, the Deputy
Director-General of the WTO or the officer next in seniority who is not such a
national shall be requested to make the necessary appointments.

6. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which
the last of the three arbitrators is appointed.

7. Any person appointed as an arbitrator of the arbitration panel shall have
expertise or experience in law, international trade, other matters covered by this
Agreement, or the resolution of disputes arising under international trade
agreements. An arbitrator shall be chosen strictly on the bases of objectivity,
reliability, sound judgment and independence, and shall conduct himself or
herself on these bases throughout the course of the arbitration proceedings and in
accordance with Annex 6 —2 (Code of Conduct for Arbitrators). Additionally,
the chairperson shall not be a national of, have his or her usual place of residence
in the territory of, or be employed by, Kazakhstan or Singapore. The chairperson
shall be a national of a state having diplomatic relations with Kazakhstan and
Singapore. If a Party considers that any arbitrator of the arbitration panel is in
violation of these requirements, the Parties shall consult and if they agree, the
arbitrator shall be removed and a new arbitrator shall be appointed in accordance
with this Article.

8. If any arbitrator of the arbitration panel appointed under this Article resigns
or becomes unable to participate in the proceeding, or is removed according to
paragraph 7, a successor shall be appointed in the same manner as prescribed for
the appointment of the original arbitrator. In such a case, the work of the
arbitration panel shall be suspended for a period beginning on the date the original
arbitrator resigns, becomes unable to participate in the proceeding, or is removed
according to paragraph 7, and all timeframes applicable to the arbitration panel
proceedings shall be extended by the amount of time for which the work of the
arbitration panel is suspended. The work of the arbitration panel shall resume on
the date the successor is appointed. The successor shall have all the powers and
duties of the original arbitrator.

Article 6.9
Terms of Reference

Unless the Parties otherwise agree no later than twenty (20) days after the
date of receipt of the request for the establishment of the arbitration panel, the
terms of reference of the arbitration panel shall be:

“To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of the Agreement on
Trade in Services and Investment between the Republic of Kazakhstan and the
Republic of Singapore, the matter referred to in the request for the establishment
of an arbitration panel pursuant to Article 6.7 (Initiation of Arbitration
Procedure), and to make findings, determinations and any recommendations for
resolution of the dispute, and issue a written report, as provided in Article 6.11
(Interim and Final Arbitration Panel Report)”.

Article 6.10
Proceedings of the Arbitration Panel

1. The arbitration panel shall meet in closed session, unless the Parties decide
otherwise.

2. Each Party shall be given the opportunity to provide at least one written
submission and to attend any of the presentations, statements or rebuttals in the
proceedings. All information or written submissions submitted by a Party to the

arbitration panel, including any comments on the interim report and responses to
questions put by the arbitration panel, shall be made available to the other Party.

3. A Party asserting that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with this
Agreement shall have the burden of establishing such inconsistency. A Party
asserting that a measure is subject to an exception under this Agreement shall
have the burden of establishing that the exception applies.

4. The arbitration panel should consult with the Parties as appropriate and
provide adequate opportunities for the development of a mutually satisfactory
resolution or mutually agreed solution.

5. The arbitration panel shall make every effort to take any decision by
consensus. Where a decision cannot be arrived at by consensus, the matter at issue
shall be decided by majority vote.

6. At the request of a Party, or upon its own initiative, the arbitration panel
may obtain information from any source it deems appropriate for the arbitration
panel proceedings. The arbitration panel also has the right to seek the opinion of
experts as it deems appropriate. The arbitration panel shall consult the Parties
before choosing such experts. Any information obtained in this manner must be
disclosed to the Parties and submitted for their comments. Where the arbitration
panel takes such information into account in the preparation of its report, it shall
also take into account any comments by the Parties on such information.

7. The deliberations of the arbitration panel and the documents submitted to
it shall be kept confidential.

8. Notwithstanding paragraph 7, either Party may make public statements as
to its views regarding the dispute, but shall treat as confidential any information
and written submissions submitted by the other Party to the arbitration panel
which that Party has designated as confidential. Where a Party has provided
information or written submissions designated as confidential, that Party shall, no
later than thirty (30) days after a request by the other Party, provide a non-
confidential summary of the information or written submissions which may be
disclosed publicly.

Article 6.11
Interim and Final Arbitration Panel Report

1. The arbitration panel shall issue an interim report to the Parties setting out:
(a) a summary of the submissions and arguments of the Parties;
(b) the findings of fact, together with reasons;

(c) its determination as to the interpretation or application of the
provisions of this Agreement, and whether

(1) a measure at issue is inconsistent with the obligations of this
Agreement; or

(11) a Party complained against has otherwise failed to carry out
its obligations under this Agreement;

(d) any other determination requested in the terms of reference; and

(e) if there is a determination of inconsistency, its recommendation that
the Party complained against bring the measure into conformity with
the obligations under this Agreement and, if the Parties agree, on the
means to resolve the dispute,

no later than ninety (90) days, or sixty (60) days in case of urgency, after the date
of establishment of the arbitration panel. Where it considers that this deadline
cannot be met, the chairperson of the arbitration panel must notify the Parties in
writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the arbitration
panel plans to issue its interim report. Under no circumstances should the
arbitration panel issue its interim report later than one hundred and twenty (120)
days after the date of its establishment.

2. Any Party may submit a written request for the arbitration panel to review
precise aspects of the interim report within thirty (30) days of its issuance. The
arbitration panel shall consider any written comments on the interim report by the
Parties within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the written comments.

After considering any such written comments by the Parties, the arbitration panel
may modify its report and make any further examination it considers appropriate.

3. The arbitration panel shall issue its final report to the Parties no later than
forty-five (45) days, or thirty (30) days in case of urgency, after the issuance of
the interim report. Where it considers that this deadline cannot be met, the
chairperson of the arbitration panel shall notify the Parties in writing, stating the
reasons for the delay and the date on which the arbitration panel plans to issue its
final report. Under no circumstances should the arbitration panel issue its final
report later than one hundred and eighty (180) days after the date of its
establishment. The final report shall set out the matters listed in paragraph 1,
include a sufficient discussion of the arguments made at the interim review stage
and address clearly the written comments of the Parties.

4. The final report of the arbitration panel shall be unconditionally accepted
by the Parties with regard to a particular dispute. In its findings and
recommendations, the arbitration panel cannot add to or diminish the rights and
obligations provided in this Agreement.

Article 6.12
Implementation of the Arbitration Panel Report

l. Each Party shall take any measure necessary to comply in good faith with
the final report of the arbitration panel. If, in its final report, the arbitration panel
determines that a measure at issue is inconsistent with the obligations under this
Agreement, or that the Party complained against has otherwise failed to carry out
its obligations under this Agreement, the Party complained against shall,
whenever possible, eliminate the non-conformity with this Agreement.

2. No later than thirty (30) days after the issuance of the final report of the
arbitration panel, the Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party
of the time it will require for compliance with the final report (hereinafter referred
to as the “reasonable period of time’’), if immediate compliance 1s not practicable.
The Parties shall endeavour to agree on the reasonable period of time.

3. If the Parties fail to agree within a period of forty-five (45) days after the
issuance of the final report of the arbitration panel on the reasonable period of

time, the complaining Party may, no later than fifty (50) days after the issuance
of the final report, request in writing to the original arbitration panel to determine
the length of the reasonable period of time. Such request shall be notified
simultaneously to the other Party. The original arbitration panel shall issue to the
Parties its determination on the length of the reasonable period of time no later
than twenty (20) days after the date of the submission of the request.

4. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer
available, the procedures set out in Article 6.8 (Composition and Establishment
of the Arbitration Panel) shall apply. The time limit for issuing the determination
on the length of the reasonable period of time shall be no later than thirty-five
(35) days! after the date of the submission of the request referred to in paragraph
3.

5. The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party before the
end of the reasonable period of time of any measure that it has taken to comply
with the final report of the arbitration panel. The reasonable period of time may
be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties at any time before its expiry.

6. In the event that there is disagreement between the Parties concerning the
existence or the consistency of any measure notified under paragraph 5 with the
provisions of this Agreement, the complaining Party may request in writing that
the original arbitration panel make a determination on the matter. Such request
shall be notified simultaneously to the other Party, and shall identify any specific
measure at issue and the provisions referred to in Article 6.3 (Scope) that it
considers the measure to be inconsistent with, in a manner sufficient to present
the disagreement clearly. The original arbitration panel shall issue to the Parties
its determination no later than forty-five (45) days after the date of the submission
of the request.

7. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer
available, the procedures set out in Article 6.8 (Composition and Establishment
of the Arbitration Panel) shall apply. The time limit for issuing the determination

' For greater certainty, the period of thirty-five (35) days does not include any days suspended
pursuant to paragraph 8 of Article 6.8 (Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration
Panel).

shall be no later than sixty (60) days?’ after the date of the submission of the
request referred to in paragraph 6.

For greater certainty, the period of sixty (60) days does not include any days suspended
pursuant to paragraph 8 of Article 6.8 (Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration
Panel).

Article 6.13
Compensation and Suspension of Concessions or Other Obligations

1. If the Party complained against fails to notify any measure taken to comply
with the final report of the arbitration panel in accordance with Article 6.12
(Implementation of the Arbitration Panel Report), or if the arbitration panel
determines that any measure notified under Article 6.12 (Implementation of the
Arbitration Panel Report) does not exist or is inconsistent with any provision of
this Agreement, the Party complained against shall enter into negotiations with
the complaining Party, with a view to reaching a mutually acceptable agreement
on compensation.

2. If the Parties fail to agree on compensation within thirty (30) days after:
(a) the expiry of the reasonable period of time; or

(b) the issuance of the arbitration panel’s determination that any
measure notified under Article 6.12 (Implementation of the
Arbitration Panel Report) does not exist or is inconsistent with any
provision of this Agreement,

as the case may be, the complaining Party shall be entitled, upon notification to
the Party complained against, to suspend concessions or other obligations arising
from this Agreement of equivalent effect to those affected by the measure that the
arbitration panel has found to be inconsistent with this Agreement. The
notification shall specify the level of concessions or other obligations that the
complaining Party intends to suspend and indicate the reasons on which the
suspension is based. The complaining Party may begin implementing the
suspension twenty (20) days after the delivery of its notification to the Party
complained against, subject to paragraph 4.

3. In considering what concessions or other obligations to suspend pursuant
to paragraph 2:

(a) the complaining Party should first seek to suspend concessions or
other obligations with respect to the same sector as that in which the
final report of the arbitration panel referred to in Article 6.11

(Interim and Final Arbitration Panel Report) has found an
inconsistency with the obligations under this Agreement;

(b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not practicable or
effective to suspend concessions or other obligations with respect to
the same sector, it may suspend concessions or other obligations
with respect to other sectors; and

(c) the complaining Party will take into consideration those concessions
or other obligations the suspension of which would least disturb the
functioning of this Agreement.

4. The Party complained against may request in writing the original
arbitration panel to make a determination on whether the level of concessions or
other obligations that the complaining Party intends to suspend is equivalent to
those affected by the measure that the arbitration panel has found to be
inconsistent with this Agreement. Such request shall be notified to the
complaining Party before the expiry of the twenty (20)-day period referred to in
paragraph 2. The original arbitration panel, having sought, if appropriate, the
opinion of experts, shall issue to the Parties its determination no later than thirty
(30) days after the date of the submission of the request. Concessions or other
obligations shall not be suspended until the arbitration panel has issued its
determination and any suspension shall be consistent with the arbitration panel’s
determination.

5. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer
available, the procedures laid down in Article 6.8 (Composition and
Establishment of the Arbitration Panel) shall apply. The time limit for issuing the
determination shall be no later than forty-five (45) days? after the date of the
submission of the request referred to in paragraph 4.

6. The compensation referred to in paragraph | and the suspension referred
to in paragraph 2 are temporary measures. Neither compensation nor suspension
is preferred to full elimination of any non-conformity with this Agreement as

> For greater certainty, the period of forty-five (45) days does not include any days suspended
pursuant to paragraph 8 of Article 6.8 (Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration
Panel).

determined in the final report of the arbitration panel. Any suspension shall only
be applied until such time as the non-conformity is fully eliminated, or the non-
conformity is determined in accordance with Article 6.14 (Compliance Review)
to have been eliminated, or the Parties have otherwise reached a mutually
satisfactory solution.

Article 6.14
Compliance Review

I. If the Party complained against considers that it has eliminated the non-
conformity with this Agreement as originally determined by the final report of
the arbitration panel, it may request in writing that the original arbitration panel
make a determination on the matter. Such request shall be notified simultaneously
to the other Party. The original arbitration panel shall issue to the Parties its
determination no later than forty-five (45) days after the date of the submission
of the request. If the arbitration panel determines that the Party complained
against has eliminated the non-conformity with the provisions of this Agreement,
the complaining Party shall cease to apply any suspension of concessions or other
obligations that it has implemented.

2. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer
available, the procedures set out in Article 6.8 (Composition and Establishment
of the Arbitration Panel) shall apply. The time limit for issuing the determination
shall be no later than sixty (60) days‘ after the date of the submission of the
request referred to in paragraph 1.

Article 6.15
Suspension and Termination of Arbitration Procedures

1. The arbitration panel shall, at the written request of both Parties, suspend
its work at any time for a period agreed by the Parties, not exceeding twelve (12)
months, and shall resume its work at the end of this agreed period at the written
request of the complaining Party, or before the end of this agreed period at the
written request of both Parties. If the complaining Party does not request the

* For greater certainty, the period of sixty (60) days does not include any days suspended
pursuant to paragraph 8 of Article 6.8 (Composition and Establishment of the Arbitration
Panel).

resumption of the arbitration panel’s work before the expiry of the agreed
suspension period, the dispute settlement procedures initiated pursuant to this
Chapter shall be deemed terminated. Subject to Article 6.4 (Choice of Forum),
the suspension or termination of the arbitration panel’s work is without prejudice
to the rights of either Party in another proceeding.

2. The Parties may, at any time, agree in writing to terminate the dispute
settlement procedures initiated pursuant to this Chapter.

Article 6.16
Rules of Procedure

Dispute settlement procedures under this Chapter shall be governed by
Annex 6 — | (Rules of Procedure for Arbitration).

Article 6.17
Rules of Interpretation

The arbitration panel shall interpret the provisions of this Agreement in
accordance with customary rules of interpretation of public international law.

Article 6.18
Expenses

Each Party shall bear the cost of its appointed arbitrator and its own
expenses and legal costs. The cost of the chairperson of an arbitration panel and
other expenses associated with the conduct of the proceedings shall be borne by
the Parties in equal shares.

Article 6.19
Time Limits

1. All time limits laid down in this Chapter shall be counted in calendar days,
the first day being the day following the act or fact to which they refer, unless
otherwise specified.

2. Any time limit referred to in this Chapter may be modified by mutual
agreement of the Parties.

CHAPTER 7
INSTITUTIONAL AND GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 7.1
Joint Committee

l. The Parties hereby establish a Joint Committee comprising representatives
of Kazakhstan and Singapore.

2. After the entry into force of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall meet
every two years in Singapore or Kazakhstan alternately, unless the Parties agree
otherwise. The Joint Committee shall be co-chaired by Ministerial-level officials
from each Party, or their delegated representatives. The Joint Committee shall set
its own agenda.

3. In urgent cases, special meetings of the Joint Committee may also be held
upon request in writing of one Party to the other and as mutually agreed by the
Parties. Such meetings shall take place at the time and venue agreed by the
Parties.

4. The Joint Committee shall:

(a) review the general functioning of this Agreement;

(b) supervise and facilitate the application of this Agreement, and further
its general aims;

(c) supervise the work of all working groups and other bodies established
under this Agreement;

(d) consider ways to further enhance trade relations between the Parties;
(e) seek to resolve any issues in connection with this Agreement; and

(f) consider any other matter related to this Agreement as the Parties may
mutually agree.

5. The Joint Committee may:

(a) decide to establish or dissolve any working groups as it considers
necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks;

(b) decide to communicate with all interested persons and experts where
relevant to any matter falling within its responsibilities;

(c) review recommendations made by working groups;

(d) make recommendations to the Parties that it deems appropriate,
including on any modification to this Agreement;

(e) adopt decisions or make recommendations as envisaged by this
Agreement;

(f) adopt its own rules of procedure; and

(g) take any other action in the exercise of its functions as the Parties may
agree.

6. The Joint Committee shall draw up its decisions and recommendations by
consensus between the Parties. The Parties shall take the necessary measures to
operationalise the decisions of the Joint Committee.

Article 7.2
Contact Points

Each Party shall designate a contact point, which shall be responsible
generally for communications with the other Party and the Joint Committee, for
any matters covered by this Agreement except as otherwise specifically set out in
other provisions of this Agreement. Each Party shall designate its contact point
in accordance with its internal procedures and notify the other Party on such
designation within ninety (90) days from the date of entry into force of the
Agreement. In the event of any change in a Party’s contact point, that Party shall
duly notify the other Party.

Article 7.3
Relationship with Other Agreements

I. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each
other under existing bilateral and multilateral agreements to which both Parties
are party, including the WTO Agreement.

2. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and other
agreements to which both Parties are party, the Parties shall immediately consult
each other with a view to finding a mutually satisfactory solution, taking into
consideration general principles of international law.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, if this Agreement explicitly contains
provisions dealing with such inconsistency as indicated in paragraph 2, those
provisions shall apply.

4. For the purposes of this Agreement, any reference to articles in the GATS
includes the interpretative notes, where applicable.

5. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan and the
Government of the Republic of Singapore on the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments, signed on 21 November 2018, this Agreement shall
prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 7.4
Evolving WTO Law

If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated
into this Agreement is amended, the Parties shall consult with each other, via the
Joint Committee, with a view to finding a mutually satisfactory solution, where
necessary.

Article 7.5
Taxation

I. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to
taxation measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of either
Party under any tax agreement to which both Parties are party. In the event of any
inconsistency between this Agreement and any such agreement, that agreement
shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. In the case of a bilateral tax
agreement between the Parties, the competent authorities under that agreement
shall have sole responsibility for determining whether any inconsistency exists
between this Agreement and that agreement.

3. Article 3.10 (Expropriation) and Section B (Investor-State Dispute
Settlement) shall apply to taxation measures to the extent that such taxation
measures constitute expropriation as provided for therein.! An investor that seeks

' With reference to Article 3.10 (Expropriation), in assessing whether a taxation measure

constitutes expropriation, the following considerations are relevant:

(a) the imposition of taxes shall not generally constitute expropriation. The mere
introduction of new taxation measures or the imposition of taxes in more than one
jurisdiction in respect of an investment, shall not in and of itself constitute
expropriation;

(b) taxation measures which are consistent with internationally recognised tax policies,
principles and practices do not constitute expropriation. In particular, taxation measures
aimed at preventing the avoidance or evasion of taxes should not, generally, be
considered to be expropriatory; and

(c) taxation measures which are applied on a non-discriminatory basis, as opposed to being
targeted at investors of a particular nationality or specific individual taxpayers, are less
likely to constitute expropriation. A taxation measure should not constitute
expropriation if, when the investment is made, it was already in force, and information
about the measure was made public or otherwise made publicly available.

to invoke Article 3.10 (Expropriation) with respect to a taxation measure must
first refer to the competent authorities described in paragraph 4, at the time that it
gives notice under Article 3.15 (Institution of Arbitral Proceedings), the issue of
whether that taxation measure involves an expropriation. If the competent
authorities do not agree to consider the issue or, having agreed to consider it, fail
to agree that the measure is not an expropriation within a period of six months of
such referral, the investor may submit its claim to arbitration under Article 3.15
(Institution of Arbitral Proceedings). For greater certainty, if the competent
authorities agree, pursuant to this paragraph, that the measure is not an
expropriation, the investor shall not invoke Article 3.10 (Expropriation) as a basis
for a claim.

4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, “competent authorities” means:

(a) for Singapore, the Ministry of Finance;

(b) for Kazakhstan, the Ministry of Finance,

or their successors.
5. For the purposes of this Article, “tax agreement” means an agreement for
the avoidance of double taxation or other international taxation agreement or

arrangement.

Article 7.6
Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance-of-Payments

1. Where a Party is in serious balance-of-payments and external financial
difficulties, or under threat thereof, 1t may adopt or maintain restrictions with
regard to trade in services and investment, and on payments and transfers related
to trade in services and investment.

2. Any restrictions adopted or maintained in accordance with paragraph |
shall:

(a) be consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the IMF;

(b) avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and
financial interests of the other Party;

(c) not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances described
in paragraph 1;

(d) be temporary and be phased out progressively as the situation
specified in paragraph 1 improves;

(e) be applied on a non-discriminatory basis and such that the other
Party is treated no less favourably than any non-party.

3. Any restrictions adopted or maintained under paragraph 1, or any changes

thereto, shall be promptly notified to the other Party.

4. The Party adopting any restrictions under paragraph 1 of this Article shall
commence consultations with the other Party through the Joint Committee to

review the restrictions adopted by it.

Article 7.7
General Exceptions”

Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner
which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination
against the other Party or its investors where like conditions prevail, or a
disguised restriction on trade in services or on investments of investors of the
other Party in the territory of a Party, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed
to prevent the adoption or enforcement by a Party of measures:

(a) necessary to protect public morals or to maintain public order;?
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

(c) imposed for the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic
or archaeological value;

(d) relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such
measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on
domestic production or consumption;

(e) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including
those relating to:

(1) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal
with the effects of a default on a contract;

(ii) | the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the
processing and dissemination of personal data and the
protection of confidentiality of individual records and
accounts; or

* For greater certainty, the application of the general exceptions to these provisions shall not
be interpreted so as to diminish the ability of governments to take measures where investors
are not in like circumstances due to the existence of legitimate regulatory objectives.

3 The public order exception may be invoked only where a genuine and sufficiently serious
threat is posed to one of the fundamental interests of society.

(ji1) safety.

Article 7.8
Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a) to require a Party to furnish any information the disclosure of which
it considers contrary to its essential security interests; or

(b) to preclude a Party from applying measures that it considers
necessary for the fulfilment of its obligations with respect to the
maintenance or restoration of international peace or security, or for
the protection of its own essential security interests.

Article 7.9
Disclosure of Information

I. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to make
available confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law
enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or which would
prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or
private.

2. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, where a Party provides
information to the other Party (or to the Joint Committee, sub-committees,
working groups or any other bodies) in accordance with this Agreement and
designates the information as confidential, the Party (or the Joint Committee, sub-
committees, working groups or any other bodies) receiving the information shall
maintain the confidentiality of the information, use it only for the purposes
specified by the Party providing the information, and shall not disclose it without
the specific written permission of the Party providing the information.

Article 7.10
Denial of Benefits

A Party may at any time deny the benefits of this Agreement to a person of
the other Party and to its investment, if such person is a juridical person that has
no substantive business operations in the territory of the other Party and is owned
or controlled by persons of either:

(a) any non-party; or

(b) the former Party.

CHAPTER 8
FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 8.1
Amendments

The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. All
amendments shall constitute an integral part of this Agreement and shall enter
into force in the manner set out in Article 8.2 (Entry into Force).

Article 8.2
Entry into Force

This Agreement shall be ratified by the Parties. This Agreement shall enter
into force on the first day of the second month following the date of the receipt
of the last written notification certifying that the Parties have completed their
respective internal legal procedures necessary for the entry into force of this
Agreement.

Article 8.3
Duration

1. This Agreement shall be in force for an indefinite period unless terminated
by either Party in accordance with paragraph 2.

2. Either Party may notify in writing the other Party of its intention to
terminate this Agreement.

3. This Agreement shall be terminated twelve months after the date of the
receipt of the written notification specified under paragraph 2. This is without
prejudice to the provision in this Agreement which qualifies the effect of the
termination, namely, Article 8.4 (Savings Clause).

Article 8.4
Savings Clause

l. For ten (10) years from the date of termination of this Agreement, the
following provisions (including the relevant Annexes) shall continue to apply to
investments of investors of the other Party in existence at the date of termination,
and without prejudice to the application thereafter of the rules of general
international law:

(a) the provisions of Chapter 3 (Investment); and

(b) — such other provisions in the Agreement as may be necessary for or
consequential to the application or interpretation of Chapter 3
(Investment).

2. For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph 1 shall not apply to the
establishment, acquisition or expansion of investments after the date of
termination.

3. Within thirty (30) days of the delivery of a notification under paragraph 2
of Article 8.3 (Duration), either Party may request consultations regarding
whether the termination of any provision of this Agreement should take effect at
a later date than provided under paragraph 3 of Article 8.3 (Duration). Such
consultations shall commence within thirty (30) days of a Party’s delivery of such
request.

Article 8.5
Annexes

The Annexes to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof.