
HAVING REGARD to the Treaty establishing the Common Market of the South between the

Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Paraguay and the Oriental

Republic of Uruguay;

REAFFIRMING their commitment to further strengthen and diversify their trade and investment

relations;

AFFIRMING their conviction that this Agreement will enhance the competitiveness of their firms

in global markets and the conditions of fair competition;

ACKNOWLEDGING the importance of transparency in international trade to the benefit of all
stakeholders;

AIMING to promote economic and social development, to create new employment opportunities, to
improve living standards and to ensure high levels of protection of health and safety and of the

environment;

REAFFIRMING their commitment to promote international trade in such a way as to contribute to

sustainable development in its economic, social and environmental dimensions;

RECOGNISING the condition and challenges faced by the Republic of Paraguay as landlocked

developing country;

WILLING to support the growth and development of micro, small and medium-sised enterprises by
enhancing their ability to participate in and benefit from the opportunities created by this

Agreement;

DETERMINED to promote and further strengthen the multilateral trading system, thereby

contributing to the harmonious development and expansion of world trade;
BUILDING on their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakesh Agreement establishing
the World Trade Organization and other multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements and

arrangements to which they are party;

HAVE AGREED, in pursuit of the above, to conclude the following Free Trade Agreement:

CHAPTER 1

INITIAL PROVISIONS AND GENERAL DEFINITIONS

ARTICLE 1.1

Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties to this Agreement hereby establish a free trade area, consistent with Article XXIV

of GATT 1994 and Article V of GATS.

ARTICLE 1.2

Objectives

The objectives of this Agreement are to liberalise and facilitate trade and investment between

the Parties in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 1.3

Definitions of General Application

For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:

(a) "Agreement on Agriculture" means the Agreement on Agriculture contained in Annex

1A of the WTO Agreement;

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

"Agreement on Government Procurement" means the Agreement on Government

Procurement contained in Annex 4 of the WTO Agreement;

"Agreement on Preshipment Inspection" means the Agreement on Preshipment

Inspection contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"Anti-Dumping Agreement" means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 contained in Annex 1A of the WTO

Agreement;

"Customs Valuation Agreement" means the Agreement on Implementation of Article
VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 contained in Annex 1A of the
WTO Agreement;

"day" means a calendar day;

"DSU" means the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of

Disputes contained in Annex 2 of the WTO Agreement;

"GATS" means the General Agreement on Trade in Services contained in Annex 1B of

the WTO Agreement;

"GATT 1994" means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 contained in
Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"Harmonised System or "HS" means the Harmonised Commodity Description and
Coding System, including its General Rules of Interpretation, Section Notes, Chapter
Notes and Subheading Notes as adopted and implemented by the State Parties in their

respective laws and regulations;

"IMF" means the International Monetary Fund;

(I)

(m)

(n)

(0)

(p)

(q)

(r)

(s)

"Import Licensing Agreement" means the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures

contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"measure" means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation,
rule, procedure, decision, administrative action, practice or any other form, and
includes measures taken by:

(i) central, regional or local governments and authorities;

(11) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central, regional

or local governments or authorities; and
(iii) MERCOSUR's decision-making bodies.
"natural person of a State Party" means any natural person who is a national of
Singapore or of a Signatory MERCOSUR State, according to their respective domestic
legislation;
"juridical person" means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised under
applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or
governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole
proprietorship or association;
"State Parties" means Signatory MERCOSUR States and Singapore;
"Parties" means Signatory MERCOSUR States, MERCOSUR and Singapore;

"person" means a natural person or a juridical person;

"person of a State Party" means a natural person or a juridical person of a State Party;

(t)

(u)

(v)

(w)

(x)

"Safeguards Agreement" means the Agreement on Safeguards contained in Annex 1A

of the WTO Agreement;

"SCM Agreement" means the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures

contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"SPS Agreement" means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"TBT Agreement" means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade contained in

Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement;

"territory" means:

(1) with respect to Singapore, its land territory, internal waters and territorial sea,
including the airspace above them, as well as any maritime area situated beyond
the territorial sea which has been or might in the future be designated under its
national law, in accordance with international law, as an area within which
Singapore may exercise sovereign rights and jurisdiction with regards to the sea,

the sea-bed, the subsoil and the natural resources;

(11) with respect to each Signatory MERCOSUR State, its land territory, internal
waters and territorial sea, including the airspace above them, as well as any
maritime area situated beyond the territorial sea which has been or might in the
future be designated under its national law, in accordance with international law,
as an area within which each Signatory MERCOSUR State may exercise
sovereign rights and jurisdiction with regards to the sea, the sea-bed, the subsoil

and the natural resources;

For greater certainty, this definition includes the exclusive economic zone and the

continental shelf, in accordance with international law, including the UNCLOS.

(y)

(Z)

(aa)

(bb)

(cc)

(dd)

"Treaty of Asuncion" means the Treaty for the constitution of a Common Market
between the Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of
Paraguay and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, done at Asuncion on 26 March 1991;

"TRIPS Agreement" means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights contained in Annex 1C of the WTO Agreement;

"UNCLOS” means the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, done at
Montego Bay on 10 December 1982;

"WIPO" means the World Intellectual Property Organization;

"WTO Agreement" means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994;

"WTO" means the World Trade Organization.

ARTICLE 1.4

Trade and investment relations governed by this Agreement

This Agreement applies to the trade and investment relations between, of the one part,

Singapore, and of the other part, the Signatory MERCOSUR States and MERCOSUR. This

Agreement does not apply to the trade and investment relations between individual Signatory

MERCOSUR States.

CHAPTER 2

NATIONAL TREATMENT AND MARKET ACCESS FOR GOODS

ARTICLE 2.1

Scope

Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply to trade in goods between

the State Parties.

ARTICLE 2.2

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) "advertising films and recordings" means recorded visual media or audio materials, consisting
essentially of images or sound, showing the nature or operation of goods or services offered
for sale or lease by a person of a State Party, provided that such materials are of a kind

suitable for exhibition to prospective customers but not for broadcast to the general public;

(b) "commercial samples of negligible value" means commercial or trade samples imported in
reasonable quantities and values, pursuant to each State Party's laws and regulations, or so
marked, torn, perforated or otherwise treated that they are unsuitable for sale or for use except

as commercial samples;

(c) "customs duty" includes a customs or import duty or a charge of any kind imposed on or in
connection with the importation of a good, including a form of surtax or surcharge in

connection with that importation, but does not include:
1

(d)
(e)

(f)

(i) a charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed in accordance with Article III(2)

(National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation) of GATT 1994;

(ii) an anti-dumping or countervailing duty imposed in accordance with Articles VI (Anti-
dumping and Countervailing Duties) and XVI (Subsidies) of GATT 1994, the Anti-
Dumping Agreement, the SCM Agreement, and Chapter 5 (Trade Remedies);

(iii) a fee or other charge imposed in accordance with Article VHI (Fees and Formalities

connected with Importation and Exportation) of GATT 1994;

(iv) safeguard measures applied in accordance with Article XIX (Emergency Action on
Imports of Particular Products) of GATT 1994, the Safeguards Agreement, and with
Chapter 6 (Bilateral Safeguards);

(v) measures authorised by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body or under Chapter 18
(Dispute Settlement); and

(vi) measures adopted to safeguard a State Party's external financial position and its balance
of payments, in accordance with Article XII (Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of
Payments) of GATT 1994 and the Understanding on Balance of Payments Provisions of
GATT 1994.

"duty-free" means free of customs duty;

"goods admitted for sports purposes" means sports requisites admitted into the territory of the
Importing State Party for use in sports contests, demonstrations or training in the territory of

that Party;

"import licensing" means an administrative procedure requiring the submission of an
application or other documentation (other than that generally required for customs clearance
purposes) to the relevant administrative body of the importing State Party as a prior condition

for importation into the territory of the importing State Party;

(g) "originating" means qualifying as originating under the rules of origin set out in Chapter 3

(Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures); and

(h) "printed advertising materials" means those goods classified in Chapter 49 of the Harmonised
System, including brochures, pamphlets, leaflets, trade catalogues, yearbooks published by
trade associations, tourist promotional materials and posters, that are used to promote,
publicise or advertise a good or service, are essentially intended to advertise a good or service,

and are supplied free of charge.
ARTICLE 2.3
National Treatment

Each State Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of another State Party in accordance
with Article III (National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation) of GATT 1994, including
its interpretative notes. To this end, the obligations contained in Article III (National Treatment on
Internal Taxation and Regulation) of GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, are
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

ARTICLE 2.4

Classification of goods

For the purposes of this Agreement, the Parties shall apply their respective customs classification
systems, at the eight-digit level, which shall be based on the HS in its 2017 version or any
subsequent amendment thereto approved by the Parties.

ARTICLE 2.5

Customs valuation

The Customs Valuation Agreement shall govern the customs valuation rules applied by the State

Parties to their mutual trade.

ARTICLE 2.6

Elimination of customs duties on imports

1. | Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, each Party shall eliminate its customs duties

on originating goods in accordance with its Schedule in Annex 2-A.

2. For each originating good under paragraph 1, the base rate of custom duties on imports shall

be that specified in a Party's Schedule in Annex 2-A.

3. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, a Party shall not increase any existing
customs duty nor introduce any new customs duty, on the importation of a good originating in
another Party. This shall not preclude a Party from raising a customs duty to the level established in

its Schedule in Annex 2-A following a unilateral reduction.

4. On request of a Party, no sooner than 3 (three) years after entry into force of this Agreement
for Singapore and all Signatory MERCOSUR States, the Parties shall consider accelerating the

elimination of customs duties set out in their respective Schedules in Annex 2-A.

5. An agreement between the Parties to accelerate the elimination of a customs duty on an
originating good shall supersede any duty rate or staging category determined pursuant to their
Schedules in Annex 2-A for that good when approved by the Parties in accordance with their

applicable legal procedures.

6. A Party may at any time unilaterally accelerate the elimination of customs duties on
originating goods of another Party set out in its Schedule in Annex 2-A. A Party shall inform

another Party as early as practicable before the new rate of customs duty takes effect.

7. For greater certainty, a Party shall not prohibit an importer from claiming for an originating

good the rate of customs duty applied under the WTO Agreement.
4

ARTICLE 2.7

Goods re-entered after repair

1. A State Party shall not apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, that re-enters
its territory after that good has been temporarily exported from its territory to the territory of
another State Party for repair, provided that the importer or exporter proves that it is a free repair,
due to a contractual obligation of guarantee, regardless of whether such repair could be performed

in the territory of the State Party from which the good was exported for repair.

2. A State Party shall not apply a customs duty and internal taxes to a good, regardless of its

origin, admitted temporarily from the territory of another State Party for repair.

3. For the purposes of this Article, "repair" means any processing operation undertaken on goods
to remedy operating defects or material damage and entailing the re-establishment of goods to their
original function and performance or to ensure their compliance with technical requirements for
their use, without which the goods could no longer be used in the normal way for the purpose for
which they were intended. Repair of goods includes restoring and maintenance. For greater
certainty, repair does not include an operation or process that:

(a) destroys a good's essential characteristics or creates a new or commercially different good; or

(b) transforms an unfinished good into a finished good.

ARTICLE 2.8

Commercial samples

Each State Party shall grant duty free entry of commercial samples of negligible value and printed

advertising materials from the territory of another State Party.

ARTICLE 2.9

Temporary admission of goods

1. For the purposes of this Article, the term "temporary admission" means the customs
procedure that allows goods to be brought into a State Party’s customs territory conditionally
relieved from payment of import duties and taxes and without application of import restrictions or
prohibitions of economic character, if such goods are brought into a State Party’s customs territory
for a specific purpose, are intended for re-exportation within a specific period, and have not
undergone any change except normal depreciation and wastage due to the use made of them, as

provided for in that State Party’s laws and regulations.

2. Each State Party shall grant temporary admission, with total conditional relief from import

duties and taxes, for the following goods, regardless of their origin:

(a) professional equipment, including equipment for the press or television, software, and
broadcasting and cinematographic equipment, that is necessary for carrying out the business
activity, trade or profession of a person who qualifies for temporary entry pursuant to the laws

of the importing State Party;

(b) goods intended for display, demonstration or use at exhibitions, fairs, meetings or similar

events, including their component parts, ancillary apparatus, and accessories;
(c) commercial samples and advertising films and recordings; and
(d) goods admitted for sports purposes.
3. Each State Party shall, on request of the person concerned and for reasons its customs authority
considers valid, extend the time limit for temporary admission, with total conditional relief from

import duties and taxes, beyond the period initially fixed.

4. — A State Party shall not condition the temporary admission, with total relief from import duties

and taxes, of the goods referred to in paragraph 1, other than to require that those goods:

(a) be used solely by or under the personal supervision of a national of another State Party in the

exercise of the business activity, trade, profession or sport of that national;

(b) not be sold or leased while in its territory;

(c) be accompanied by a guarantee in an amount no greater than the charges that would otherwise

be owed on entry or final importation, releasable on exportation of the goods;

(d) be capable of identification when imported and exported;

(e) be exported on the departure of the national referred to in subparagraph (a), or within any
other period reasonably related to the purpose of the temporary admission that the State Party

may establish, or within one year, unless extended;

(f) be admitted in no greater quantity than is reasonable for their intended use; and

(g) be otherwise admissible into the State Party's territory under its laws.

5. Each State Party shall grant temporary admission, with total conditional relief from import
duties and taxes, for containers and pallets regardless of their origin, that are in use or to be used in

the shipment of goods in international traffic.

6. If any condition that a State Party imposes under paragraph 3 has not been fulfilled, the State
Party may apply the customs duty and any other charge that would normally be owed on the good in

addition to any other charges or penalties provided for under its law.

7. Each State Party shall adopt and maintain procedures providing for the expeditious release of
goods admitted pursuant to this Article. To the extent possible, those procedures shall provide that
when a good admitted pursuant to this Article accompanies a national of another State Party who is

seeking temporary entry, the good shall be released simultaneously with the entry of that national.

8. Each State Party shall permit a good temporarily admitted pursuant to this Article to be
exported through a customs port other than the port through which it was admitted.

9. Each State Party shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations, provide that the importer
or other person responsible for a good admitted pursuant to this Article shall not be liable for failure
to export the good on presentation of satisfactory proof to the importing State Party that the good

was destroyed within the period fixed for temporary admission, including any lawful extension.

10. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement:

(a) each State Party shall allow a container used in international traffic that enters its territory
from the territory of another State Party to exit its territory on any route that is reasonably

related to the economic and prompt departure of such container;

(b) aState Party shall not require any guarantee or impose any penalty or charge solely by reason

of any difference between the port of entry and the port of departure of a container;

(c) aState Party shall not condition the release of any obligation, including any guarantee, that it
imposes in respect of the entry of a container into its territory on its exit through any

particular port of departure; and

(d) aState Party shall not require that the carrier bringing a container from the territory of another
State Party into its territory be the same carrier that takes the container to the territory of that

other State Party.

ARTICLE 2.10

Quantitative import and export restrictions

1. | Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, a State Party shall not adopt or maintain any
prohibition or restriction other than duties, taxes and other charges on the importation of any good
of another State Party or on the exportation or sale for export of any good destined for the territory
of another State Party, except in accordance with Article XI (General Elimination of Quantitative
Restrictions) of GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. To this end, Article XI (General

Elimination of Quantitative Restrictions) of GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, or any

equivalent provision of a successor agreement to which the State Parties are party, are incorporated

into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. The Parties understand that GATT 1994 rights and obligations incorporated by paragraph 1
prohibit, in any circumstances in which any other form of restriction is prohibited, a State Party

from adopting or maintaining:

(a) export or import price requirements, except as permitted in enforcement of anti-dumping and

countervailing duty orders or price undertakings; or

(b) voluntary export restraints inconsistent with Article VI (Anti-dumping and Countervailing
Duties) of GATT 1994, as implemented under Article 18 (Undertakings) of the SCM
Agreement and Article 8 (Price Undertakings) of the Anti-Dumping Agreement.

ARTICLE 2.11

Export prohibitions and restrictions on foodstuffs

1. Without prejudice to the conditions set out in Article 12(1) (Disciplines on Export
Prohibitions and Restrictions) of the Agreement on Agriculture under which a State Party may
apply an export prohibition or restriction, other than a duty, tax or other charge, on foodstuffs, a
State Party that imposes such a prohibition or restriction on the exportation or sale for export of
foodstuffs considered critical! to another State Party shall notify the measure to that other State

Party as far in advance as practicable.

2. A State Party that is required to notify a measure pursuant to paragraph 1 shall respond to any
question posed by another State Party regarding the measure, in writing, within 30 (thirty) days of

the receipt of the question when feasible.

1 The State Party that imposes such a prohibition or restriction should be a net exporter of that foodstuff, and that

prohibition or restriction should affect the food security of the importing State Party.
9

3. A State Party contemplating continuation of a measure notified pursuant to paragraph 1
beyond one year from the date it is imposed should notify the other State Parties as far in advance

as practicable.

ARTICLE 2.12

Administrative fees and formalities

1. Each State Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VII (Fees and Formalities
connected with Importation and Exportation) of GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, that
all fees and charges of whatever character (other than export taxes, customs duties, charges
equivalent to an internal tax or other internal charge applied consistently with Article II(2)
(National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation) of GATT 1994, and anti-dumping and
countervailing duties) imposed on, or in connection with importation or exportation of, goods are
limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered, which shall not be calculated on an
ad valorem basis, unless it has a fixed maximum fee, and do not represent an indirect protection to
domestic goods or a taxation of imports or exports for fiscal purposes. Each State Party shall

endeavour to phase out any ad valorem based fees and charges.

2. Each State Party shall make available online a current list of the fees and charges it imposes in

connection with importation or exportation.
3. Each State Party shall periodically review its fees and charges, including consular fees applied

on imports, with a view to either eliminating them, or reducing their number and diversity, where

practicable.

ARTICLE 2.13

Import and export licensing

10

1. The State Parties shall introduce and administer any import or export licensing procedure in

accordance with:

(a) Paragraphs | through 9 of Article 1 (General Provisions) of the Import Licensing Agreement;

(b) Article 2 (Automatic Import Licensing) of the Import Licensing Agreement; and

(c) Article 3 (Non-Automatic Import Licensing) of the Import Licensing Agreement.

To this end, the provisions referred to in subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) are incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement. The State Parties shall apply those provisions, mutatis mutandis, for

any export licensing procedures.

2. A State Party shall only adopt or maintain licensing procedures as a condition for importation
into its territory or exportation from its territory to another State Party when other appropriate

procedures to achieve an administrative purpose are not reasonably available.

3. A State Party shall not adopt or maintain non-automatic import or export licensing procedures
unless necessary to implement a measure that is consistent with this Agreement. A State Party
adopting non-automatic licensing procedures shall indicate clearly the measure being implemented

through such licensing procedure.

4. — Each State Party shall respond within 60 (sixty) days to enquiries from another State Party
regarding any licensing procedures which the State Party to which the request is addressed intends
to adopt or has adopted or maintained, as well as the criteria for granting or allocating import or

export licenses.

5. Promptly after this Agreement enters into force for a State Party, that State Party shall notify
the other State Parties of its existing import licensing procedures, if any. The notification shall

include the information specified in Article 5(2) (Notification) of the Import Licensing Agreement.

6. A State Party shall be deemed to be in compliance with paragraph 5 with respect to an

existing import licensing procedure if:

11

(a) it has notified that procedure to the Committee on Import Licensing provided for in Article 4
(Institutions) of the Import Licensing Agreement together with the information specified in

Article 5(2) (Notification) of that agreement; or

(b) in the most recent annual submission due before entry into force of this Agreement for that
State Party to the Committee on Import Licensing in response to the annual questionnaire on
import licensing procedures described in Article 7(3) (Review) of the Import Licensing
Agreement, it has provided, with respect to that procedure, the information requested in that

questionnaire.

7. Each State Party shall notify the other State Parties of any new import licensing procedures it
adopts and any modifications it makes to its existing import licensing procedures, whenever
possible, no later than 60 (sixty) days before the new procedure or modification takes effect. In no
case shall a State Party provide such notification later than 60 (sixty) days following the date of its
publication. A State Party that notifies a new import licensing procedure or a modification to an
existing import licensing procedure to the Committee on Import Licensing in accordance with
Article 5(1), 5(2) and 5(3) (Notification) of the Import Licensing Agreement shall be deemed to

have complied with this requirement.

8. | Where a State Party has denied an import license application with respect to a good of another

State Party, it shall, on request of the applicant and within a reasonable period after receiving the

request, provide the applicant with a written explanation of the reason(s) for the denial.

ARTICLE 2.14

Technical consultations

1. Each Party shall designate and notify a contact point to facilitate communications amongst the

Parties on any matter covered by this Chapter.

2. A Party may request technical consultations to discuss any matter arising under this Chapter,

by making a request to another Party through the contact points referred to in paragraph 1. The

12

request shall identify the reasons for the request, including a description of the Party's concerns and

an indication of the provisions of this Chapter to which the concerns relate.

3. | Within a reasonable period of time after the receipt of a request under paragraph 2, the Party
which has received the request shall provide a reply. If still deemed necessary, within 30 (thirty)
days of the receipt of the reply, the Parties shall discuss, in person or via electronic means, the
matter identified in the request. If the Parties choose to meet in person, the meeting shall take place

in such locations and through such means as the Parties mutually decide.

4. — Unless the Parties that participate in the technical consultations agree otherwise, the

discussions and any information exchanged in the course of the consultations shall be confidential.

5. This Article refers to technical consultations and is without prejudice to a Party's rights and
obligations under Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement). For greater certainty, a request for technical
consultations under this Article shall not be deemed to be a request for consultation under Chapter

18 (Dispute Settlement).

ARTICLE 2.15

Subcommittee on Trade in Goods and Rules of Origin

1. | The Parties hereby establish a Subcommittee on Trade in Goods and Rules of Origin

(hereinafter referred to as Subcommittee in this Chapter), composed of government representatives

of each State Party.

2. The Subcommittee shall meet as necessary at the request of a Party or the Joint Committee to

consider matters arising under this Chapter and Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin).

3. The Subcommittee’s functions shall include:

(a) reviewing and monitoring the implementation and administration of the chapters referred to

above;

13

(b)

(d)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

promoting trade in goods between the Parties, including:

(i) addressing non-tariff measures covered under the chapters referred to in paragraph 2;

(ii) consulting on broadening and accelerating tariff elimination under this Agreement; or

(iii) proposing any modification to the product specific rules of origin;

reviewing the future amendments to the HS to ensure that each Party's obligations under this

Agreement are not altered;

consulting on and endeavouring to resolve any differences that may arise between the Parties

on matters related to:

(1) the classification of goods under the HS; or

(ii) Annex 2-A and national nomenclatures.

making recommendations and endeavouring to resolve any issue relating to the chapters

referred to in paragraph 2;

undertaking any additional work that the Joint Committee may assign to it;

ensuring the proper functioning of the Rules of Origin Chapter and examining all issues

arising thereunder;

agreeing to hold ad hoc meetings on any aspect related to the implementation of the chapters

referred to in paragraph 2, including their annexes and appendices; and

preparing and submitting reports on modifications to the Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin), to be

considered by the Joint Committee.

14

4. |The Subcommittee shall consult, as appropriate, with other subcommittees, working groups
and other bodies established under this Agreement when addressing issues of relevance to those

subcommittees.

15

CHAPTER 3

RULES OF ORIGIN

SECTION A

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 3.1

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) "chapter", "heading" and "subheading" means a chapter (two-digit code), heading (four-digit
code) or subheading (six-digit code) of the Harmonised System (HS);

(b) "classified" refers to the classification of a product or material under a particular chapter,

heading or subheading;

(c) "competent authority" means:

(1) for Singapore: Singapore Customs;

(ii) for Argentina: Secretaria de Comercio or its successors;

(111) for Brazil: Secretaria Especial da Receita Federal do Brasil and Secretaria de Comércio

Exterior or its successors;

(iv) for Paraguay: Ministerio de Industria y Comercio or its successors;

(v) for Uruguay: Ministerio de Economia y Finanzas Politica Comercial or its successors;

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

Q)

"custom value" means the value determined in accordance with the Customs Valuation

Agreement;

"ex-works price" means the price paid for a product to the manufacturer in the State Party
where the last working or processing was carried out, in accordance with the international
commercial terms "incoterms", provided the price includes the value of all the materials used,
direct and indirect costs, and profit minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid

when the product obtained is exported;

"goods" means both materials and products;

"manufacture" means working or processing, including assembling;

"material" means any ingredient, raw material, component or part used in the manufacture of

a product;

"product" means the manufactured or finished product, even if it is intended for later use in

another manufacturing operation;

"value of non-originating materials" means the custom value at the time of importation of the
non-originating materials used including the freight and insurance to the place of import in a
State Party, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid
for the materials in a State Party, which may exclude all costs incurred in transporting the
non-originating materials within a Party such as freight, insurance and packing costs as well
as any other known and ascertainable cost incurred there.

SECTION B

CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS"

ARTICLE 3.2

General requirements

For the purposes of this Agreement, a product shall be considered as originating in a Party if:

(a) it has been wholly obtained in the territory of a Party, in accordance with Article 3.3 (Wholly

obtained products);

(b) it incorporates non-originating materials provided that they have undergone sufficient

working or processing in the territory of a Party, in accordance with Article 3.4 (Sufficient

working or processing); or

(c) it has been produced entirely in the territory of one or both of the Parties, exclusively from

originating materials.

ARTICLE 3.3

Wholly obtained products

The following products shall be considered as wholly obtained in the territory of a Party:

(a) minerals and other naturally occurring substances extracted or taken from its soil, subsoil

waters, seabed or beneath the seabed there;

(b) plants and vegetable products grown and harvested there;

(c) live animals born and raised there;

(d) products from live animals born and raised there;

(e) products from slaughtered animals born and raised there;

(f) products obtained by hunting, trapping, or fishing conducted there;

(g) products of aquaculture where the fish, crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates

are born or raised there;

(h)

Q)

(k)

(I)

(m)

products, other than a fish, crustacean, mollusc and other marine life taken by a State Party or
a person of a State Party from the Area!, provided that State Party or the person of that State
Party has the exclusive right to exploit it in accordance with international law, including the

UNCLOS;

a fish, crustacean, mollusc and other marine life taken from the high seas:

(1) by vessels that are registered, listed or recorded and entitled to fly the flag of that State
Party; or

(11) by chartered vessels where the fishing licenses are issued by the same State Party whose

persons are chartering the vessel;

and that State Party has the right to exploit those waters in accordance with international law,

including UNCLOS;

a good, referred to in subparagraph (1), obtained or produced on board of a factory ship,

provided that:

(1) the factory ship is registered, listed or recorded and entitled to fly the flag of that State
Party; or

(11) in the case of a chartered factory ship, the fishing license is issued by the same State

Party whose persons are chartering the factory ship;

goods extracted from "the Area" where it has exclusive exploitation rights, in accordance with

UNCLOS;

waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there;

used products collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials and not for their

original purpose; or

For the purposes of this Article, "Area" has the same meaning as in UNCLOS.
4

(n) products manufactured in a Party exclusively from materials listed in subparagraphs (a) to

(m).

ARTICLE 3.4

Sufficient working or processing

1. A product obtained from non-originating materials shall be considered to have undergone
sufficient working or processing if the applicable product-specific rule of Annex 3-B (Product-

specific Rules) is fulfilled.

2. Singapore shall give due consideration to any request from MERCOSUR for Paraguay to
benefit from more flexible rules than those set in Annex 3-B (Product-specific Rules), for
manufactured products obtained from non-originating materials. Such consideration shall be given

taking into account the following parameters:

a) the request shall have a clear implementation period;

b) — the request shall be made up to 15 (fifteen) years after the entry into force of this agreement;

and

c) — the request shall be limited to an additional 5 (five) percentage points of maximum non-

originating materials on a value rule, when applicable.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the operations defined in Article 3.5 (Insufficient working or

processing) are considered as insufficient to obtain originating status.

4. The product-specific rules referred to in paragraph 1 indicate the working or processing which
must be carried out on non-originating materials used in manufacturing and concern only such
materials. It follows that if a product, which has acquired originating status in a Party in accordance
with paragraph 1, is further processed in that Party and used as material in the manufacture of

another product, no account shall be taken of the non-originating components of that material.

5. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, non-originating materials which do not fulfil the conditions set

out in Annex 3-B (Product-specific Rules) may be used, provided that:

(a) their total value does not exceed 10% of the ex-works price of a product; and

(b) no maximum value or weight of non-originating materials set out in Annex 3-B (Product-

specific Rules) is exceeded through the application of this paragraph.

This paragraph shall not apply to products falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonised
System.

6. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, tolerances stipulated in Notes 6 and 7 of Annex 3-A (Introductory
Notes) shall apply for products falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonised System.

ARTICLE 3.5
Insufficient working or processing
1. | Without prejudice to paragraph 3, the following operations shall be considered as insufficient
working or processing to confer the status of originating products, whether or not the requirements

of Article 3.4 (Sufficient working or processing) are satisfied:

(a) preserving operations to ensure that a product retains its condition during transport and

storage, such as freezing or thawing;

(b) changes of packaging and breaking-up and assembly of packaging;

(c) washing, cleaning, removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;

(d) ironing or pressing of textiles or textile products;

(e) simple painting and polishing;

(f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and rice;

6

(g)

(h)

Q)

(k)

(I)

(m)

(n)

(0)

(p)

2.

colouring of sugar or forming sugar lumps;

peeling and removal of stones, cores, pips and shells from fruits, nuts and vegetables;

sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;

sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching;

simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards and all

other simple packaging operations;

simple addition of water or dilution or dehydration or denaturation of products;

affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on products or

their packaging;

simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds;

simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or disassembly of products

into parts; or

slaughter of animals.

For the purposes of paragraph 1, "simple" describes operations or processes which need

neither special skills nor machines, apparatus or equipment especially produced or installed to carry

out the operation or process.

3.

All operations or processes carried out in a Party on a product shall be taken into account

when determining whether these operations or processes are considered as insufficient working or

processing.

ARTICLE 3.6

Accumulation of origin

Originating goods or materials of any of the Parties used in the production of goods in the territory

of another Party shall be considered to originate in the territory of the latter Party.

ARTICLE 3.7

Unit of qualification

For purposes of this Chapter:

(a) _ the tariff classification of a particular product or material shall be determined according to the

Harmonised System;

(b) where a product composed of a group or assembly of articles or components is classified
pursuant to the terms of the Harmonised System under a single tariff provision, the whole

shall constitute the particular product; and

(c) where a shipment consists of a number of identical products classified under the same tariff

provision of the Harmonised System, each product shall be considered separately.

ARTICLE 3.8

Packaging materials, packing materials and containers

1. Each Party shall provide that if a product is subject to a maximum value of the non-
originating materials requirement, the value of the packaging materials and containers in which the
product is packaged for retail sale, if classified with the product, in accordance with Rule 5(b) of
the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonised System, shall be taken into account as
originating or non-originating, as the case may be, in calculating the maximum value of the non-
originating materials of the product. For other requirements, packaging materials and containers

shall be disregarded in determining the origin of that product.

2. Packing materials and containers for shipment shall be disregarded in determining the origin

of that product.

ARTICLE 3.9

Accessories, spare parts and tools

Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or

vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the price thereof or which are not

separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with the piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or

vehicle in question.

ARTICLE 3.10

Neutral elements

In order to determine whether a product originates in a Party, it shall not be necessary to determine

the origin of the following which might be used in its manufacture:

(a) energy and fuel;

(b) plant and equipment;

(c) machines and tools; and

(d) other goods which do not enter, and which are not intended to enter, into the final

composition of the product.

ARTICLE 3.11

Accounting segregation

1. If originating and non-originating fungible materials are used in the working or processing of
a product, the determination of whether the materials used are originating may be determined on the

basis of an accounting segregation system without keeping the materials in separate stocks.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, "fungible materials" means materials that are of the same
kind and commercial quality, with the same technical and physical characteristics, which cannot be

distinguished from one another once they are incorporated into the finished product.

3. The accounting segregation system used on the basis of the general accounting principles
applicable in the Parties, depending on where the product is manufactured, must ensure that no
more final products receive originating status than would have been the case if the materials had

been physically segregated.
4. A producer using an accounting segregation system must keep records of the operation of the
system that are necessary for the respective customs authority to verify compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter.

ARTICLE 3.12

Sets

Sets, as defined in Rule 3 of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonised System,
shall be regarded as originating when all component products are originating. Nevertheless, when a
set is composed of originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be regarded as
originating, provided that the value of the non-originating products does not exceed 15% per cent of
the ex-works price of the set.

SECTION C

TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS

ARTICLE 3.13

10

Principle of territoriality

1. The conditions for acquiring originating status set out in the provisions of Section B (Concept

of "originating products") must be fulfilled without any interruption in a Party.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if an originating product is returned to the exporting Party after
having been exported to a non-Party without having undergone any operation there, beyond those

necessary to preserve it in good condition, that product shall retain its originating status.

ARTICLE 3.14

Non-alteration

1. Originating products, for which preferential tariff treatment is requested in a Party, shall be
the same products as exported from another Party. They must not be altered or transformed in any
way nor undergo operations other than those to preserve their condition, or to add or affix marks,
labels, seals or any documentation to ensure compliance with domestic requirements of the

importing Party, prior to being declared for preferential tariff treatment.

2. Products mentioned in paragraph | shall be transported directly between Singapore and
MERCOSUR. The products may undergo transit, storage, splitting of consignments, repacking, as
well as the operations mentioned in paragraph | in a non-party and shall retain their originating

status, provided they remain under customs control in that non-party.

3. Paragraphs | and 2 shall be considered fulfilled, unless the customs authority of the importing
Party has reason to believe the contrary. In such case, the customs authority of the importing Party
may request the importer or his/her representative to provide appropriate evidence of compliance,
which may be given by any means, including contractual transport documents such as bills of
lading or factual or concrete evidence based on marking or numbering of packages or any other

evidence.

ARTICLE 3.15

11

Exhibitions
1. Originating products, sent for exhibition outside the Parties and sold after the exhibition for
importation in a Party, shall benefit on importation from the provisions of this Agreement provided

it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities of the importing country that:

(a) an exporter has consigned these products from a Party to the country in which the exhibition

is held and has exhibited them there;

(b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person in a Party;

(c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in the state

in which they were sent for exhibition; and

(d) the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose

other than demonstration at the exhibition.

2. A proof of origin must be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in the

normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon.

3. Paragraph | shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar
public show or display which is not organised for private purposes in shops or business premises
with a view to the sale of foreign products, and during which the products remain under customs
control.

SECTION D

PROOF OF ORIGIN

ARTICLE 3.16

Proof of origin

12

1.

Products originating in a Party, on importation into another Party, shall benefit from

preferential treatment under this Agreement upon submission of a proof of origin.

2.

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

(c)

4.

Either of the following shall be considered as a proof of origin:

an origin declaration by an exporter or producer, in accordance with Article 3.17 (Origin

declaration) 7°; or

a certificate of origin by an issuing body in accordance with Article 3.18 (Procedure for the

issuance of a certificate of origin).

A proof of origin shall:

specify that the good is originating and meets the requirements of this Chapter;

be in writing, or any electronic format as notified by an importing Party; and

be in the English language.

Each Party shall provide that a proof of origin remains valid for one year from the date on

which it is issued or completed. Preferential treatment shall be claimed within such period to the

customs authorities of the importing Party.

5.

A proof of origin may be issued or completed when the products to which it relates are

exported, or after exportation.

ARTICLE 3.17

Products originating in Singapore shall, on importation into a MERCOSUR State, benefit
from preferential treatment under this Agreement upon submission of an origin declaration
completed by an exporter or producer established in a Party, in accordance with Article 17
(Origin declaration).

For exporters based in MERCOSUR, the application of paragraph 2(a) shall apply after
MERCOSUR has notified to Singapore that such legislation applies to the exporters in the
MERCOSUR State where the exporter completing the Origin declaration is based.

13

Origin declaration

1. | An Origin declaration can be completed by an exporter or producer established in a State
Party for products originating in that State Party and otherwise fulfilling the requirements of this

Chapter.

2. The origin declaration must be completed on an invoice or any other commercial document
that describes the originating product in sufficient detail to enable its identification and that contains

a set of minimum data elements as set out in Annex 3-D (Minimum data elements).

3. The exporter or producer making out an origin declaration shall be prepared to submit, at any
time, upon the request of the competent authority of the Party of export and, in accordance with
Article 3.27 (Verification of origin), upon the request of the competent authority of the Party of
import, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well

as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter.

4. Each Party shall provide that if a producer certifies the origin of a good, the certification of

origin is completed on the basis of the producer having information that the good is originating.

5. | When the exporter is not the producer of the product, the exporter may complete the origin

declaration on the basis of:

(a) its knowledge of whether the product qualifies as an originating product, based on

information in the exporter's possession;

(b) its reasonable reliance on the producer's written representation that the product qualifies as an

originating product; or

(c) a completed origin declaration for the product, voluntarily provided to the exporter by the

producer.

ARTICLE 3.18

14

Procedure for the issuance of a certificate of origin

1. A certificate of origin shall be issued by the competent authorities of the exporting country on
application having been made in writing by the exporter or producer. The application form should
contain a signed statement by the producer which indicates the characteristics and components of

the final product as well as it productive process.

2. For this purpose, the exporter or producer shall fill out both the certificate of origin and the
application form. A specimen of the certificate of origin shall appear in Annex 3-C (Certificate of
origin). If the certificate of origin is hand-written, it shall be completed in ink, in printed characters.
The description of the products must be given in the box reserved for this purpose without leaving
any blank lines. Where the box is not completely filled, a horizontal line must be drawn below the

last line of the description, the empty space being crossed through.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the competent authorities may authorise a government office or
a certifying office or institution to issue the certificate of origin, in accordance with the provisions

of this Article.

4. A certificate of origin shall be issued by the competent authorities of a Signatory
MERCOSUR State if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in that State
Party and fulfil the other requirements of this Chapter.

5. The exporter or producer applying for the issuance of a certificate of origin shall be prepared
to submit, at any time, upon the request of the competent authorities of the Party of export and, in
accordance with Article 3.27 (Verification of origin), upon the request of the competent authority of
the Party of import, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products

concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter.

6. | The issuing competent authorities shall also ensure that the forms referred to in paragraph 2
are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description of
the products has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent

additions.

7. The competent authorities of the exporting country issuing a certificate of origin shall keep

for at least 3 (three) years the application form referred to in paragraph 2.

15

ARTICLE 3.19
Issuance of a duplicate certificate of origin

1. ‘In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a certificate of origin, the exporter may apply to the

competent authorities which issued it for a duplicate made out on the basis of the export documents

in their possession.

2. The duplicate issued in this way must be endorsed with the following word: "DUPLICATE".
3. | The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2, the number and date of the original certificate of
origin shall be inserted in the "Remarks" box of the duplicate certificate of origin.
ARTICLE 3.20
Issuance of a proof of origin on the basis of a proof of origin issued previously
1. If originating products for which a proof of origin has been submitted are stored in a
warehouse or a free zone under customs control in a State Party, it could be possible for the customs
or competent authority to issue one or more proofs of origin, based on the original proof of origin,
for the purpose of sending all or some of these products elsewhere to another State Party.
2. In the case of MERCOSUR, the provisions of paragraph | shall apply only to the State Parties
that have decided on its implementation and that have duly notified the Joint Committee thereof.
ARTICLE 3.21

Supporting documents

The documents referred to in Article 3.17 (3) (Origin declaration) and Article 3.18 (5) (Procedure

for the issuance of the certificate of origin), in paper or electronic form, used for the purpose of

16

proving that products covered by a proof of origin can be considered as products originating in a

Party and fulfil the other requirements of this Chapter, may consist inter alia of the following:

(a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain the goods

concerned, contained for example in his accounts or internal book-keeping;

(b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in a Party

where these documents are used in accordance with domestic legislation;

(c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in a Party, issued or made out in a

Party, where these documents are used in accordance with domestic legislation; and

(d) proof of origin proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in a Party

in accordance with this Chapter.

SECTION E

PREFERENTIAL TREATMENT

ARTICLE 3.22

Importation requirements

1. Each Party shall grant preferential tariff treatment in accordance with this Agreement to
originating products of a Party imported from another Party, on the basis of a proof of origin

referred to in Article 3.16 (Proof of origin).

2. Unless otherwise provided for in this Section, each Party shall require an importer in its
territory that claims preferential tariff treatment for a product imported into its territory from the

territory of another Party to:

(a) make a written statement that the product qualifies as an originating product and this written

statement shall form part of the import document and be based on valid proof of origin;

17

(b) have the proof of origin in its possession at the time the written statement referred to in

subparagraph (a) is made;

(c) provide, on request of that Party's customs administration, the proof of origin and, if required
by that customs administration, such other documentation relating to the importation of the

product in accordance with the domestic law of the importing Party; and

(d) promptly make a corrected statement and pay any duties owing when the importer has reason
to believe that the proof of origin on which a written statement was based contains

information that is not correct.

3. Where, at the time of importation, the customs authority of the importing Party has a
reasonable doubt on the origin of a product, the product may be released upon a deposit or the
payment of duties, pending the outcome of the verification. The deposit or duties paid shall be
refunded once the outcome of the verification confirms that the product complies with the

requirements under this Chapter.

ARTICLE 3.23

Importation by instalments

Where, at the request of an importer and on conditions laid down by the customs authority of the

importing Party, a dismantled or non-assembled product within the meaning of Rule 2(a) of the

General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonised System is imported by instalments, a proof

of origin may be submitted to the customs authority upon importation of the first instalment.

ARTICLE 3.24

Obligations relating to exportation and importation

1. An exporter or producer who has provided a proof of origin shall keep a copy of the proof of

origin and supporting documents for at least 5 (five) years from the date of completion or issuance,

18

or longer if required by laws and regulations of the State Party of export, including records

concerning the purchase of, cost of, value of, shipping of and payment for, the exported product.

2. For the same period mentioned in paragraph 1, the producer who has provided a proof of

origin shall also keep a copy of records concerning:

(a) the purchase of, cost of, value of, and payment for all materials, including indirect materials,

used in the production of the exported product; and

(b) the production of the product in the form in which it was exported.

3. | When becoming aware of or having reason to believe that a proof of origin contains incorrect
information, the exporter or producer who has provided the proof of origin shall immediately notify
the importer and the customs authority or competent governmental authorities of the exporting State

Party of any change affecting the originating status of each product covered by that proof of origin.

4. An importer who has been granted preferential tariff treatment shall keep the proof of origin
and other relevant documents for at least 3 (three) years from the date on which preferential

treatment was granted, or longer if required by the laws and regulations of the State Party of import.

5. | When becoming aware of or having reason to believe that a proof of origin contains incorrect
information, an importer who has been granted preferential tariff treatment shall immediately notify
the customs authority of the importing State Party of any change affecting the originating status of

each product covered by that proof of origin.

6. | When an importer claims preferential tariff treatment for a product imported from the territory
of another State Party, the importing State Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the
product if the importer, exporter or producer fails to comply with any requirement under this
Chapter.

ARTICLE 3.25

Discrepancies and formal errors

19

1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof of origin and
those made in the documents submitted to the customs administration for the purpose of carrying
out the formalities for importing the products shall not because of that fact render the proof of
origin null and void if it is established that this document corresponds to the products submitted.
2. Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof of origin shall not cause this document
to be rejected if these errors do not create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements made
in the document.
3. Each State Party shall provide that if the customs administration of the State Party into whose
territory a product is imported determines that a proof of origin is illegible, defective on its face, or
has not been completed in accordance with this Chapter, the importer shall be granted a period of
30 (thirty) days from the date of receipt of the notification sent by the customs administration to
provide the corrected proof of origin.
ARTICLE 3.26

Third party invoice
A State Party shall not reject a claim for preferential tariff treatment for the sole reason that the
invoice was issued in a non-Party.

SECTION F

ORIGIN VERIFICATION AND OTHER MATTERS

ARTICLE 3.27

Verification of origin

20

1. For the purposes of determining whether a product imported into its territory qualifies as an
originating product, the importing State Party may, through its competent authority, conduct a

verification of any claim for preferential tariff treatment by means of:

(a) a written request or questionnaire seeking information, including records, from the exporter or
producer of the product in the territory of another State Party, limited to information to

determine whether the product is originating;

(b) a visit to the premises of an exporter or producer in the territory of another State Party to
observe the facilities used in the production of the product, and review the records referred to
in Article 3.24 (1) and (2) (Obligations relating to exportation and importation) limited to

records on whether the product is originating; or

(c) any other procedures as may be mutually decided by the State Parties.

2. Each State Party shall provide that verifications of origin concerning whether a product is

originating or whether all other requirements of this Chapter are fulfilled shall be:

(a) based on risk assessment methods applied by the competent authority of the importing State

Party, which may include random selection; or

(b) made when the importing State Party has reasonable doubts about whether the product is

originating or whether all other requirements of this Chapter have been fulfilled.

3. If an importing State Party makes a verification request pursuant to paragraph 1, it shall
inform the competent authorities of the exporting State Party at the time of its verification request to
the exporter or producer. In addition, on request of the importing State Party, the State Party where
the exporter or producer is located may, as it deems appropriate and in accordance with its laws and
regulations, assist with the verification. This assistance may include providing a contact point for
the verification, collecting information from the exporter or producer on behalf of the importing
State Party, or other activities in order that the importing State Party may make a determination as
to whether the good is originating. The importing State Party shall not deny a claim for preferential
tariff treatment solely on the ground that the State Party where the exporter or producer is located
did not provide requested assistance. If an importing State Party initiates a verification pursuant to

subparagraph (b) of paragraph 1, it shall, at the time of the request for the visit, inform the State

21

Party where the exporter or producer is located and provide the opportunity for the officials of the

State Party where the exporter or producer is located to accompany them during the visit.

4. If an importing State Party has initiated a verification pursuant to paragraph 1, it shall inform

the importer of the initiation of the verification.

5. For the purposes of verifying the origin of a product, the importing State Party may request
the importer of the product to voluntarily obtain and supply information voluntarily provided by the
exporter or producer of the product in the territory of another State Party, provided that the
importing State Party shall not consider the failure or refusal of the importer to obtain and supply
such information as a failure of the exporter or producer to supply the information or as a ground
for denying preferential tariff treatment. If the importer does not provide information to the
importing State Party or the information provided is not sufficient to support a claim for preferential
tariff treatment, the importing State Party shall request information from the exporter or producer
pursuant to subparagraph (a) or (b) of paragraph | before it may deny the claim for preferential

tariff treatment.
6. If an importing State Party conducts a verification pursuant to this Article, it shall accept
information, including records or documents, directly from the competent authority of the exporting party, exporter, producer, or importer.

7. A written request for information or for a verification pursuant to subparagraph (a) or (b) of

paragraph 1 shall:

(a) be in English or in an official language of the State Party of the person to whom the request is

made;

(b) include the identity of the government authority issuing the request;

(c) state the reason for the request, including the specific issue the requesting State Party seeks to

resolve with the verification;

(d) include sufficient information to identify the good that is being verified; and

22

(e) include a copy of relevant information submitted with the good, including the certification of
origin.
8. Each State Party shall allow an exporter or producer who receives a written request or
questionnaire pursuant to subparagraph (a) of paragraph | not less than 30 (thirty) days from the
date of receipt of such request or questionnaire to provide the information and documentation
required or the completed questionnaire. On written request by the exporter or producer made
during that period, the importing State Party shall grant the exporter or producer a single extension
of the deadline for a period of 30 (thirty) days.
9. If an exporter or producer fails to provide the information and documentation required by a
written request or questionnaire or fails to return a duly completed questionnaire within the period
or extension set out in paragraph 8, an importing State Party may deny preferential tariff treatment

to the product in question in accordance with the procedures set out in paragraphs 18 to 21.

10. Prior to conducting a verification visit pursuant to subparagraph (b) of paragraph 1, a State

Party shall, through its competent authority:

(a) deliver a written notification of its intention to conduct the visit:

(1) to the exporter or producer whose premises are to be visited;

(11) to the competent authority of the State Party in whose territory the visit is to occur; and

(b) obtain the written consent of the exporter or producer whose premises are to be visited.

11. The notification referred to in paragraph 10 shall include:

(a) the name of the entity issuing the notification;

(b) the name of the exporter or producer whose premises are to be visited;

(c) the date and place of the proposed verification visit;

23

(d) the scope of the proposed verification visit, including specific reference to the product that is

the subject of the verification;

(e) the names and titles of the officials performing the verification visit; and

(f) the legal authority for the verification visit.

12. When, within 30 (thirty) days of receipt of a notification pursuant to paragraph 10, an
exporter or producer has not given its written consent to a proposed verification visit, the notifying
State Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the product that would have been the subject of

the visit.

13. Each State Party shall allow, when the exporter or producer receives notification pursuant to
subparagraph (a)(i) of paragraph 10, the exporter or producer to, on a single occasion, within 15
(fifteen) days of receipt of the notification, request the postponement of the proposed verification
visit for a period not exceeding 60 (sixty) days from the date of such receipt or for such longer

period as agreed to by the notifying State Party.

14. The State Party whose competent authority receives notification pursuant to subparagraph
(a)(11) of paragraph 10, may, within 15 (fifteen) days of receipt of the notification, postpone the
proposed verification visit for a period not exceeding 60 (sixty) days from the date of such receipt

or for such longer period as the State Parties may decide.

15. A State Party shall not deny preferential tariff treatment to a product based solely on the

postponement of a verification visit pursuant to paragraphs 13 or 14.

16. A State Party shall permit an exporter or a producer whose product is the subject of a
verification visit by another State Party to designate two observers to be present during the visit,
provided that:

(a) _ the observers shall only participate as such; and

(b) the failure of the exporter or producer to designate observers shall not result in the

postponement of the visit.

24

17. When a State Party conducts a verification of origin involving a value test, de minimis
calculation or any other provision in this Chapter to which Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles may be relevant, it shall apply such principles as are applicable in the territory of the

State Party in which the verification is taking place.

18. The State Party conducting a verification shall make a determination following a verification
as expeditiously as possible and no later than 90 (ninety) days after it receives the information
necessary to make the determination, including, if applicable, any information received pursuant to
paragraph 21, and no later than 365 days after the first request for information or other action
pursuant to paragraph 1. If permitted by its laws and regulations, a State Party may extend the 365
days period in exceptional cases, such as where the technical information concerned is very

complex.

19. The State Party conducting a verification shall provide the exporter or producer whose
product is the subject of the verification with a written determination of whether the product
qualifies as an originating product, including findings of fact and the legal basis for the
determination. The importing State Party shall also provide a written determination to the importer

and to the competent authorities of the exporting State Party.

20. When a State Party determines as a result of an origin verification that the product that is the
subject of the verification does not qualify as an originating product, the State Party shall include in
its written determination pursuant to paragraph 18 a written notice of intent to deny preferential

tariff treatment of the product.

21. A written notice of intent pursuant to paragraph 20 shall provide for a period of not less than
30 (thirty) days during which the exporter or producer of the product may provide, with regard to
that determination, written comments or additional information that will be taken into consideration

by the State Party prior to completing the verification.

22. For the purposes of this Article, the importing State Party shall ensure that all communication
to the exporter or producer and to the State Party of export be sent by any means whereby a
confirmation of receipt can be proven. The periods referred to in this Article will begin from the

date of such receipt.

25

23. When the verification carried out by a State Party shows that an exporter or producer
repeatedly makes false or unsupported representations that a product imported into the State Party's
territory qualifies as an originating product, the State Party may suspend the preferential tariff
treatment to be accorded to subsequent shipment of identical product according to the Customs
Valuation Agreement exported or produced by such a person until that person establishes that the

shipment complies with this Chapter, in accordance with its domestic laws, regulations or practices.

ARTICLE 3.28
Cooperation between customs authorities and other competent governmental authorities

1. The customs authorities or competent governmental authorities of the Signatory MERCOSUR
States shall provide to the customs authorities of Singapore, by communication through the
MERCOSUR Secretariat, specimens of stamps‘ used for the issue of certificates of origin and the
addresses of the customs or competent governmental authorities responsible for verifying origin

declarations.

2. Where the competent governmental authority of an exporting State Party designates other
entities or bodies to carry out the issuance of certificate of origin, the exporting State Party shall

notify in writing the other Parties of its designees.

3. For the purposes of Article 3.16 (Proof of origin), Singapore and, on the other side, one or
more Signatory MERCOSUR States, may agree to establish systems that allow proofs of origin
listed in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of paragraph 1 to be issued electronically or submitted

electronically.

4. The Parties shall endeavour to resolve technical matters related to the implementation or
application of this Chapter, to the extent possible, through direct consultations between the customs
authority or competent governmental authorities or in the Sub-committee on Trade in Goods and

Rules of Origin.

4 For greater certainty, the customs authorities or competent governmental authorities of the
Signatory MERCOSUR States shall provide the customs authorities of Singapore information
on the stamp specimens by providing the customs authorities of Singapore access to the
ALADI database.

26

ARTICLE 3.29

Confidentiality
1. Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with its legislation, the confidentiality of the
information collected under this Chapter and shall protect that information from disclosure that
could prejudice the competitive position of a person to whom the information relates.
2. Each Party shall ensure that the information collected under this Chapter is not used for
purposes other than the administration or enforcement of determinations of origin and of customs
matters, except with the authorisation of the person or State Party who provided the information.
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, each Party may use any information collected under this
Chapter in any administrative, jurisdictional or judicial proceedings instituted for failure to comply
with customs and tax related laws and regulations implementing this Chapter.

ARTICLE 3.30

Dispute settlement

1. | Where the Parties raise a question as to the implementation or interpretation of this Chapter,

they shall be submitted to the Subcommittee on Trade in Goods and Rules of Origin.

2. Nothing in this Article shall affect the procedures or the rights of the Parties under Chapter 18

(Dispute Settlement).

3. In all cases the settlement of disputes between the importer and the customs or competent

governmental authorities of the importing country shall be under the legislation of the said country.

SECTION G

27

FINAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 3.31

Penalties

Appropriate penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a

document which contains incorrect information for the purposes of obtaining preferential treatment

for products.

ARTICLE 3.32

Products in transit or storage

The provisions of this Chapter may be applied to products which, on the date of entry into force of

this Agreement, are either in transit or in temporary storage in a customs warehouse or free zone

under customs control. For such products, a proof of origin may be completed retrospectively up to

six months after the entry into force of this Agreement, provided that the provisions of this Chapter

and in particular Article 3.14 (Non-alteration) have been fulfilled.

ARTICLE 3.33

Explanatory notes

The Parties may consider the need for "Explanatory notes" regarding the interpretation, application

and administration of this Chapter.

28

CHAPTER 4

CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TRADE FACILITATION

ARTICLE 4.1

Scope

This Chapter shall apply to import, export and transit procedures required for goods traded between

the State Parties, in accordance with their respective laws and regulations.

ARTICLE 4.2

Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

ensure that procedures and practices related to the importation, exportation, and transit of
goods are predictable, consistent, transparent, and facilitate trade, including through the

expeditious clearance of goods;

promote efficient administration of procedures related to the importation, exportation, and

transit of goods, and the expeditious clearance of goods;

simplify import, export and transit procedures of the State Parties and harmonise them to the

extent possible with relevant international standards;

promote cooperation between the competent authorities of the State Parties; and

facilitate trade between the State Parties, including through a strengthened environment for

global and regional supply chains.

ARTICLE 4.3

Transparency

1. Each State Party shall publish online, free of charge, and as far as practicable in the English
language, all its laws, regulations, trade-related guidelines, procedures and administrative rulings

subject to the State Parties' laws and regulations.

2. Each State Party shall designate or maintain one or more enquiry points to address enquiries
from interested persons related to import, export and transit procedures and shall make information
concerning the procedures for making such enquiries publicly available online. Such inquiries will

be addressed, as far as possible, in the language in which the consultation was conducted.

3. Import, export and transit procedures of each State Party shall, where possible and to the
extent permitted by its laws and regulations, conform with the standards and recommended

practices of the World Customs Organisation (hereinafter referred to as "WCO") and the WTO.

4. — Each State Party shall review its customs import, export and transit procedures with a view to

their simplification to facilitate trade.

5. Each State Party shall, in a manner consistent with its laws and regulations and its legal
system, provide opportunities and an appropriate time period to traders and other interested parties
to comment on the proposed introduction or amendment of laws and regulations of general

application related to the movement, release, and clearance of goods, including of goods in transit.

6. Each State Party shall provide for regular consultations between its relevant authorities and

traders within its territory in order to identify their needs regarding the development and

implementation of trade facilitation measures.

ARTICLE 4.4

Customs cooperation

1.

Each State Party shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations, cooperate with the other

State Parties, through:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

2.

information sharing and other activities, as appropriate, in the following areas:

(1) simplification and modernisation of procedures;

(ii) initiatives on trade facilitation;

(111) customs valuation;

(iv) border agency coordination;

(v) single window systems;

(vi) relations with the business community; and

(vil) supply chain security and risk management;

providing regular updates on changes in their respective laws and regulations on the matters

listed above;
developing joint initiatives related to import, export, and transit procedures including
technical assistance, capacity building, and measures to improve the delivery of services to

the business community; and

exchanging experiences on trade facilitation, their functions and their work towards

facilitating domestic coordination and implementation of WTO commitments.

For the purposes of this Article, each State Party shall designate at least one contact point and

inform the other State Parties upon entry into force of the Agreement.

ARTICLE 4.5

Advance rulings

1. Each State Party shall issue an advance ruling in accordance with its laws and regulations

with respect to:

(a) tariff classification of a product; and

(b) origin of goods.

2. In addition to the advance rulings specified under subparagraphs (a) and (b) of paragraph 1,
the State Parties shall endeavour to issue advance rulings with respect to the appropriate method or
criteria, and the application thereof, to be used for determining the customs value under a particular
set of facts in accordance with the Customs Valuation Agreement.

3. Each State Party shall issue an advance ruling with respect to tariff classification and origin as
expeditiously as possible, and in no case later than 150 (one-hundred and fifty) days after it receives
all necessary information to issue the advance ruling or such time as specified in its laws and

regulations, whichever is shorter.

4. Each State Party shall establish a validity period for an advance ruling of at least 3 (three)

years from the date of the issuance of the advance ruling.

5. A State Party may modify, revoke or invalidate an advance ruling which it has issued if:

(a) _ the ruling was based on an error of fact;

(b) the information provided is false or inaccurate;

(c) there is a change in the material facts or circumstances on which the ruling was based;

(d) any of the conditions to which the advance ruling was made subject cease to be met or

complied with; or

(e) a change is required to conform with a judicial decision or a change in its laws and

regulations.

6. Each State Party shall provide that any modification, revocation, or invalidation of an advance
ruling shall be effective on the date on which the modification, revocation, or invalidation is issued,
or on such later date as may be specified therein, and shall not be applied to importations of a good
that have occurred prior to that date. Where a State Party revokes or modifies or invalidates an
advance ruling with retroactive effect, it may only do so where the ruling was based on incomplete,

incorrect, false or misleading information.

7. Where a State Party revokes, modifies, or invalidates an advance ruling, it shall provide

written notice to the applicant setting out the relevant facts and the basis for its decision.

ARTICLE 4.6

Review and appeal

1. Each State Party shall ensure that any person to whom it issues a determination on a customs

matter has access to:

a) administrative review of the determination, independent! of the employee or office that issued
p ploy

the determination; or

(b) judicial review of the determination.

2. Each State Party shall ensure that an authority that conducts a review pursuant to paragraph |
notifies the parties to the matter in writing of its decision and the reasons for the decision. A State

Party may require a request as a condition for providing the reasons for a decision in the review.

! The level of administrative review may include any authority supervising the customs

administration.

ARTICLE 4.7

Single window and use of automated system

1. Each State Party shall establish or maintain a single window, enabling traders to submit
documentation and/or data requirements for importation, exportation, or transit of goods through a
single entry point to the participating authorities or agencies. After the examination by the
participating authorities or agencies of the documentation and/or data, the results shall be made

available to the applicants through the single window in a timely manner.

2. In cases where documentation and/or data requirements have already been received through
the single window, the same documentation and/or data requirements shall not be requested by
participating authorities or agencies except in urgent circumstances and other limited exceptions

which are made public.

3. Each State Party shall adopt or maintain procedures to determine duties and taxes upon the
submission of the customs declaration and to allow electronic payment of duties and taxes upon

approval of the customs declaration.
4. — The State Parties shall endeavour to promote the interoperability between the National Single
Windows which allows the creation of conditions for the mutual recognition of electronic
documentation and data requirements necessary to carry out trade activities. For these purposes, the
State Parties shall endeavour to develop institutional, legal and technical basis to ensure information
exchange between each State Party's National Single Windows.

ARTICLE 4.8

Express shipments

Each State Party shall adopt or maintain expedited customs procedures for express shipments, while

maintaining appropriate control and customs selection. These procedures shall:

(a) provide for pre-arrival processing of information related to express shipments;

(b) allow the single submission of information covering all goods contained in an express

shipment, if possible through electronic means;

(c) minimise, to the extent possible, the documentation required for the release of express

shipments; and
(d) provide, in normal circumstances, for an express shipment to be released within 6 (six)

business hours after the submission of the necessary information for the shipment, provided

that the shipment has arrived and all requirements have been met.

ARTICLE 4.9
Risk management

1. Each State Party shall adopt or maintain a risk management system for assessment and
targeting that enables its customs administration and relevant authorities to focus its inspection

activities on high-risk consignments and expedite the release of low-risk consignments.

2. Each State Party shall design and apply risk management in a manner as to avoid arbitrary or

unjustifiable discrimination, or a disguised restriction on international trade.

3. Each State Party shall base risk management on an assessment of risk through appropriate

selectivity criteria. Such selectivity criteria may include, inter alia, the Harmonised System code,

nature and description of the goods, country of origin, country from which the goods were shipped,

value of the goods, compliance record of traders, and type of means of transport.

ARTICLE 4.10

Authorised Economic Operator ("AEO")

A State Party operating an AEO program shall:

(a) afford another State Party the possibility of negotiating mutual recognition of AEO programs

(b)

(c)

for the purpose of facilitating international trade while ensuring effective customs control;

work together on the customs-related aspects of securing and facilitating the international

trade supply chain in accordance with the Framework of Standards to Secure and Facilitate

Global Trade of the WCO; and

foster cooperation between the State Parties' customs authorities and other government

authorities or agencies in relation to authorised economic operator programs.

ARTICLE 4.11

Perishable goods

In order to prevent deterioration of perishable goods, each State Party shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

provide for the release of perishable goods, under normal circumstances, within the shortest

possible time;

give the appropriate priority to perishable goods when scheduling any examinations that may

be required;

in cases of delays in the release of perishable goods, provide, upon request, a communication

on the reasons for the delay;

either arrange, or allow an importer to arrange, for proper storage of perishable goods whose
release is pending. Each State Party may require that any storage facilities arranged by the

importer have been approved or designated by its relevant authorities; and

provide for the release of perishable goods in exceptional circumstances where it would be
appropriate to do so, and provided that all regulatory requirements have been met, outside the

business hours of customs and other relevant authorities.

(b)

(c)

(d)

2.

ARTICLE 4.12

Release of goods

Each State Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that:

provide for the release of goods within a period of time no longer than required to ensure

compliance with its laws and regulations;

provide, in normal circumstances, for goods to be released within 48 (forty-eight) business
hours of arrival unless the importer fails to fulfil the requirements of the importing State

Party's laws and regulations or where the release is delayed by virtue of force majeure;

provide for electronic submission and processing of information in advance of the arrival of

the goods to enable release of the goods on arrival; and
allow the release of imported goods prior to the final determination by its customs
administration of the applicable customs duties, taxes, fees and charges, provided the good is

otherwise eligible for release.”

Notwithstanding subparagraph (d) of paragraph 1, each State Party may require importers to

provide security as a condition for the release of goods when such security 1s required to ensure that

obligations arising from the importation of the goods will be fulfilled.

3.

If a State Party allows for the release of goods conditioned on a security, it shall adopt or

maintain procedures that:

(a)

(b)

ensure that the amount of any security is no greater than that required to ensure that

obligations arising from the importation of the goods will be fulfilled;

ensure that any security shall be discharged as soon as possible after its customs authorities
are satisfied that the obligations arising from the importation of the goods have been fulfilled;

and

Uruguay shall comply with this provision in accordance with its notification under Article 16
of the Trade Facilitation Agreement of the WTO (G/TFA/N/URY/1, signed on March 7, 2019).

9

(c) allow importers to provide security:

(i) in the form of bank guarantees, bonds, or other non-cash financial instruments covering

multiple entries; and

(11) in any other forms specified by its customs authorities.

ARTICLE 4.13

Temporary import

1. Each State Party shall allow goods to be brought into its customs territory conditionally
relieved, totally or partially, from payment of import duties and taxes if such goods are brought into
its customs territory for a specific purpose, are intended for re-exportation within a specific period,
and have not undergone any change except normal depreciation and wastage due to the use made of

them.

2. Each State Party may accept, for the temporary imports of goods, ATA Carnets issued by an
association that is part of the ATA international guarantee chain, certified by the relevant authorities
and valid in the customs territory of the importing State Party. Alternatively, the State Parties may

establish different simplified procedures that include a guarantee system.

10

CHAPTER 5

TRADE REMEDIES

SECTION A

GLOBAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES

ARTICLE 5.1

Global safeguard measures

1. The State Parties affirm their rights and obligations concerning global safeguard measures
under Article XIX (Emergency Action on Imports of Particular Products) of GATT 1994 and the

Safeguards Agreement.

2. Except as provided for in paragraph 3, no provision of this Agreement shall be construed as

imposing any rights or obligations on the State Parties with respect to global safeguard measures.

3. A State Party that initiates a safeguard investigatory process shall provide to another State

Party an electronic copy of the notification given to the WTO Committee on Safeguards pursuant to

subparagraph (a) of Article 12.1 (Notification and Consultation) of the Safeguards Agreement.

SECTION B

ANTI-DUMPING AND COUNTERVAILING MEASURES

ARTICLE 5.2
1

General provisions

1. | The State Parties affirm their rights and obligations under Article VI (Anti-dumping and
Countervailing Duties) of GATT 1994, the Anti-Dumping Agreement and the SCM Agreement and
shall apply anti-dumping and countervailing measures in accordance with this Chapter. To this end,
this Agreement shall apply to the extent not specifically provided for in the Anti-Dumping
Agreement and the SCM Agreement.

2. The State Parties should use anti-dumping and countervailing measures in full compliance
with the relevant WTO requirements. Those measures should be based on a fair and transparent
system and careful consideration should be given to the interests of the State Party against which

such a measure is to be imposed.

ARTICLE 5.3
Practices relating to anti-dumping and countervailing duty proceedings

1. | In any proceeding in which the investigating authorities determine to conduct an in-person
verification of information that is provided by a respondent', and that is pertinent to the calculation
of anti-dumping duty margins or the level of a countervailable subsidy, the investigating authorities

shall promptly notify each respondent of their intent, and:

(a) at least 10 (ten) days prior to an in-person verification, provide the respondent a list of topics
that the respondent should be prepared to address during the verification visit and that

describes the types of supporting documentation to be made available for review; and

! For the purposes of this paragraph, "respondent" means a producer, manufacturer, exporter,
importer, and, where appropriate, a government or government entity, that is required by a
State Party's investigating authorities to respond to an antidumping or countervailing duty

questionnaire.
2

(b) after an in-person verification is completed, and subject to the protection of confidential
information’, issue a written report that describes the methods and procedures followed in
carrying out the verification and the extent to which the information provided by the
respondent was supported by the documents reviewed during the verification. The report shall
be made available to all interested parties in sufficient time for the parties to defend their

interests.

2. A State Party's investigating authorities shall maintain a non-confidential file for each

investigation and review that contains:

(a) all non-confidential documents that are part of the record of the investigation or review; and

(b) to the extent feasible without revealing confidential information, non-confidential summaries

of confidential information that is contained in the record of each investigation or review.

3. The non-confidential file and a list of all documents that are contained in the record of the
investigation or review shall be physically available for inspection and copying during the

investigating authorities’ normal business hours or electronically available for download.

4. — If, in an anti-dumping or countervailing duty action that involves imports from another State
Party, a State Party's investigating authorities determine that a timely response to a request for
information does not comply with the request, the investigating authorities shall inform the
interested party that submitted the response of the nature of the deficiency and, to the extent
practicable in light of time limits established to complete the anti-dumping or countervailing duty

action, provide that interested party with an opportunity to remedy or explain the deficiency.

ARTICLE 5.4

Notifications and consultations

For the purposes of this chapter, "confidential information" includes information which is
provided on a confidential basis and which 1s by its nature confidential, for example, because
its disclosure would be of significant competitive advantage to a competitor or because its
disclosure would have a significantly adverse effect upon a person supplying the information
or upon a person from whom that person acquired the information.

3

1. | Upon receipt by a State Party's competent authorities of a properly documented anti-dumping
application with respect to imports from another State Party, as soon as possible in accordance with
each State Party's laws and regulations before initiating such anti-dumping investigation, the State

Party shall provide written notification to another State Party of its receipt of the application.

2. Upon receipt by a State Party's competent authorities of a properly documented countervailing
duty application with respect to imports from another State Party, and before initiating an
investigation, the State Party shall provide written notification to that other State Party of its receipt
of the application as soon as possible in accordance with each State Party's laws and regulations in
advance of the date of initiation and invite that other State Party for consultations on the

application.

ARTICLE 5.5

Treatment of confidential information

1. The investigating authority of a State Party shall require interested parties providing
confidential information to furnish non-confidential summaries thereof, referred to in subparagraph
(6.5.1) of Article 6(6.5) (Evidence) of the Anti-Dumping Agreement. These non-confidential
summaries referred to in subparagraph (6.5.1) of Article 6(6.5) (Evidence) of the Anti-Dumping
Agreement shall be in sufficient detail to permit a reasonable understanding of the substance of the
information submitted in confidence in order to allow the other interested parties in the

investigation an opportunity to respond and defend their interest.

2. The exceptional circumstances referred to in subparagraph (6.5.1) of Article 6(6.5)
(Evidence) of the Anti-Dumping Agreement shall be limited to the cases where summarisation
necessarily leads to disclosure of the confidential information or a failure to provide a sufficient
level of detail to permit a reasonable understanding of the substance of the information submitted in

confidence.

ARTICLE 5.6
4

Disclosure of the essential facts

The investigating authorities shall, before a final determination is made, inform all interested parties
of the essential facts under consideration. Such disclosure shall take place in sufficient time for the
parties to defend their interests, and they should be allowed to make their comments in accordance

with each State Party's laws and regulations.

ARTICLE 5.7

Undertakings

1. After a State Party's competent authorities initiate an anti-dumping or countervailing duty
investigation, upon request of another State Party, the State Party shall transmit to that other State
Party's competent authorities written information regarding the State Party's procedures for
requesting its authorities to consider an undertaking on price including the timeframes for offering

and concluding any such undertaking.

2. In an anti-dumping investigation, where a State Party's competent authorities have made a
preliminary affirmative determination of dumping and injury caused by such dumping, the State
Party shall afford due consideration and opportunity for meetings to exporters of another State Party
regarding proposed price undertakings which, if accepted, may result in suspension of the
investigation without imposition of anti-dumping duties, consistent with the State Party's laws and

regulations.

3. In a countervailing duty investigation, where a State Party's competent authorities have made
a preliminary affirmative determination of subsidisation and injury caused by such subsidisation,
the State Party shall afford due consideration and opportunity for meetings to another State Party
and exporters of that other State Party regarding proposed price undertakings, which, if accepted,
may result in suspension of the investigation without imposition of countervailing duties, consistent

with the State Party's laws and regulations.

ARTICLE 5.8

Lesser duty rule

If a State Party decides to apply an anti-dumping or countervailing duty in respect of goods from
another State Party, it shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations, apply a duty that is less
than the margin of dumping or total amount of the subsidy if that level is adequate to remove the

injury to the domestic industry.

ARTICLE 5.9

Sunset reviews

1. A State Party shall not initiate a review pursuant to Article 11(11.3) (Duration and Review of
Anti-Dumping Duties and Price Undertakings) of the Anti-Dumping Agreement without a request
submitted by or on behalf of its domestic industry.

2. A request to initiate a review pursuant to Article 11(11.3) (Duration and Review of Anti-
Dumping Duties and Price Undertakings) of the Anti-Dumping Agreement should be submitted by
or on behalf of the domestic industry no later than 3 (three) months prior to the end of the five (5)
year period following the date of the imposition of the anti-dumping duty or of the five (5) year
period following the effective date of the most recent review of the anti-dumping duty. The review

shall normally be completed within 12 (twelve) months from the date of initiation.

3. Each State Party shall analyse with special care requests for the extension of measures in

force against exporters of another State Party.

ARTICLE 5.10:

Exemption from investigation after termination

Except where circumstances have changed, the State Parties shall not initiate an investigation where
a previous investigation of the same product from the same State Party resulted in a negative final
determination within | (one) year prior to the filing of the application. If an investigation is initiated
in such a case, the State Parties shall, in the notice of initiation, explain the change in circumstances
which warrants initiation.

SECTION C

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 5.11

Special agricultural safeguards

The State Parties shall exempt bilateral trade subject to preferential treatment from the application

of Article 5 (Special Safeguard Provisions) of the Agreement on Agriculture.

ARTICLE 5.12

Rules of origin

The preferential rules of origin under this Agreement shall not apply to this Chapter.

ARTICLE 5.13

Non-application of dispute settlement

The Parties shall not have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement) for

any matter arising under this Chapter.

CHAPTER 6

BILATERAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES

SECTION A

DEFINITIONS

ARTICLE 6.1

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(c)

"competent investigating authority" means:

(i) in the case of Singapore, the competent investigating authority, which will be appointed

in the event of a bilateral safeguard investigation; and

(ii) in the case of Signatory MERCOSUR States, the Ministerio de Economia or its
successor in Argentina; Ministério do Desenvolvimento, Industria, Comércio e Servic¢o
or its successor in Brazil; Ministerio de Industria y Comercio or its successor in
Paraguay; and Politica Comercial del Ministerio de Economia y Finanzas or its successor

in Uruguay;

"domestic industry" means the producers as a whole of the like or directly competitive
products operating within the territory of the State Party, or those whose collective output of
the like or directly competitive products constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic

production of those products;

"interested parties" shall include:

(i) exporters or foreign producers or importers of a product subject to investigation, or a
1

trade or business association, a majority of the members of which are producers,

exporters or importers of such product;

(ii) the government of the exporting State Party; and

(iii) producers of the like or directly competitive product in the importing State Party or a
trade and business association, a majority of the members of which produces the like or
directly competitive product in the territory of the importing State Party.

(d) "serious injury" means a significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic industry;

(e) "threat of serious injury" means serious injury that is clearly imminent, based on facts and not

merely on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility; and
(f) "transition period" means:

(1) the total period of the Tariff Liberalisation Schedule plus an additional five-year period
for goods for which the Tariff Liberalisation Schedule of the State Party applying the
measure provides for tariff elimination in less than 8 (eight) years; and

(11) the total period of the Tariff Liberalisation Schedule plus an additional three-year period
for goods for which the Tariff Liberalisation Schedule of the State Party applying the
measure provides for tariff elimination in 8 (eight) or more years.

SECTION B

CONDITIONS FOR THE APPLICATION OF BILATERAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES

ARTICLE 6.2

1. | Considering the reduction or elimination of a customs duty after the entry into force of this
Agreement, a State Party may, in exceptional circumstances, apply bilateral safeguard measures
against another State Party under the conditions established in this Section, when the imports of a

2

product under preferential terms originating in such State Party have increased in such quantities,
absolute or relative to domestic production of the importing State Party, and under such conditions

as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic industry of the importing State Party.

2. The bilateral safeguard measure shall be applied only to the extent necessary to prevent or

remedy serious injury or threat thereof.
3. Bilateral safeguard measures shall only be applied following an investigation by the
competent investigating authorities of the importing State Party under the procedures established in
this Chapter.
4. A State Party shall not apply, with respect to the same good, at the same time:
(a) a safeguard measure in accordance with paragraph 1; and
(b) a measure under Article XIX (Emergency Action on Imports of Particular Products) of GATT
1994 and the Safeguards Agreement or a measure with equivalent effect.

ARTICLE 6.3
A State Party shall not apply, extend or keep in force a bilateral safeguard measure beyond the
expiration of the transition period.

ARTICLE 6.4
Bilateral safeguard measures shall only be applied between Singapore on the one side and
individual Signatory MERCOSUR States on the other. Singapore may conduct bilateral safeguard
investigations on exports of the same good originating in more than one Signatory MERCOSUR

States simultaneously, provided that the conditions established in this Section are considered for

each one of them separately.

ARTICLE 6.5
3

Bilateral safeguard measures adopted under this Chapter shall consist of:

(a) a temporary suspension of the schedule of tariff reduction of the good concerned provided for

under this Agreement; or

(b) a reduction of the tariff preference of the product concerned so that the rate of customs duty

does not exceed the lesser of:

(i) the most-favoured-nation applied rate of customs duty on the product in effect at the

time the measure is taken; or

(ii) the base rate of customs duty referred to in the Tariff Schedules under Appendices 2-A-
1 and 2-A-2 of Annex 2-A (Elimination of Customs Duties).

ARTICLE 6.6

1. Bilateral safeguard measures shall be applied only for the period necessary to prevent or
remedy the serious injury and to facilitate adjustment of the domestic industry. This period shall not

exceed 2 (two) years, including the period of application of any provisional measure.

2. Upon termination of the bilateral safeguard measure, the margin of preference shall be the one
that would be applied to the product in the absence of the measure, according to the Tariff

Elimination Schedule.

ARTICLE 6.7

1. The bilateral safeguard measure may be extended only once and for a maximum period
identical to the initial period of application, provided that it has been determined, in accordance
with the procedures set out in this Chapter, that the measure continues to be necessary to prevent or
remedy serious injury and that the domestic industry provides evidence that it is adjusting. The
measure extended shall not be more restrictive than it was at the end of the initial period. In order to
facilitate adjustment in a situation where the expected duration of a bilateral safeguard measure is

4

over | (one) year, the State Party that applies the measure shall progressively liberalise it at regular

intervals during the period of application.

2. No safeguard measure shall be applied again to the same product imported under the Tariff
Elimination Schedule, unless a period equal to the half of the total duration of the previous

measures has elapsed.

ARTICLE 6.8
1. The investigation to determine serious injury or threat thereof as a result of increased imports of
a product under preferential terms shall take into consideration all relevant factors of an objective and
quantifiable nature having a bearing on the situation of the domestic industry affected, particularly the

following:

(a) the amount and rate of the increase in preferential imports of the product concerned in

absolute and relative terms;

(b) the share of the internal market taken by increased preferential imports;

(c) the price of the preferential imports;

(d) the consequent impact on the domestic industry of the like or directly competitive products,
based on factors, including: production, productivity, capacity utilisation, inventories, sales,

market share, prices, profits and losses, return on investment, cash flow and employment;

(e) the relationship between the preferential and non-preferential imports, as well as between the

increase of one and the other;

(f) | the existence of a causal link between the increased imports of the product under preferential

terms and the serious injury or threat thereof to the domestic industry; and

(g) other factors that, although not related to the evolution of preferential imports, may have a

causal relationship with the injury or the threat of injury to the domestic industry in question.

2. The investigation to determine serious injury or threat thereof shall demonstrate the existence of
a causal link between the increased imports of the product under preferential terms and the serious

injury or threat thereof to the domestic industry.

3. | When factors other than increased preferential imports are causing injury to the domestic

industry at the same time, such injury shall not be attributed to the increased preferential imports.
4. The period of data collection for the investigation to determine serious injury or threat thereof
should normally be of at least the last 36 (thirty-six) months, unless otherwise duly justified and in

exceptional circumstances, and shall end as close to the date of the submission of the request as is

practicable.

SECTION C

INVESTIGATION AND TRANSPARENCY PROCEDURES

ARTICLE 6.9
A State Party may only initiate an investigation for a bilateral safeguard measure upon request of
the domestic industry or of a trade and business association of domestic producers of the like or
directly competitive products in the importing State Party.

ARTICLE 6.10
The request to initiate an investigation shall contain at least the following information:
(a) a description of the product: the name and description of the imported product concerned, its

tariff heading and the tariff treatment in force, as well as the name and description of the like

or directly competitive product;

(b) the names and addresses of the producers or association that submit the request;

(c)

(d)

1.

a list of all other known producers of the like or directly competitive product; and

evidence that the conditions for imposing the safeguard measure set out in Article 2(1) are

met. In this respect, the request shall generally contain the following information:

(i)

(il)

(iii)

(iv)

the production volume of producers submitting or represented in the application and an
estimation of the production of other known producers of the like or directly

competitive product;

the rate and amount of the increase in total and bilateral imports of the product
concerned in absolute and relative terms, including at least the last 36 (thirty-six)
months prior to the date of the lodging of the application, for which information is

available;

the level of import prices during the same period; and

where information is available, objective and quantifiable data regarding the like or
directly competitive product, on the volume of total production and of total sales on the
internal market, inventories, prices for the internal market, productivity, capacity
utilisation, employment, profits and losses, market share, of the requesting firms or of
those represented in the request, including at least the last 36 (thirty-six) months

previous to the presentation of the request, for which information is available.

ARTICLE 6.11

Any information which is by nature confidential or which is provided on a confidential basis

shall, upon cause being shown, be treated as such by the competent investigating authorities. Such

information shall not be disclosed without permission of the party submitting it. Parties providing

confidential information may be requested to furnish non-confidential summaries thereof or, if such

parties indicate that such information cannot be summarised, the reasons why a summary cannot be

provided. However, if the competent authorities find that a request for confidentiality is not

warranted and if the party concerned is either unwilling to make the information public or to

authorise its disclosure in generalised or summary form, the authorities may disregard such

information unless it can be demonstrated to their satisfaction from appropriate sources that the

information is correct.

2. Request for confidentiality will not be granted for information regarding basic uses and

characteristics of the product concerned.

3. If information regarding production, production capacity, employment, wages, volume and
value of domestic sales, average price is presented on a confidential basis, the competent
investigating authorities shall ensure that the petitioner or the domestic industry provides
meaningful non-confidential summaries disclosing at least aggregated data or, in cases in which the
disclosure of aggregated data would endanger the confidentiality of the company's data, indexes for
each 12 (twelve) month period under investigation are submitted, so as to ensure the appropriate
right of defence of the interested parties. In this regard, confidentiality requests should be
considered in situations in which particular market or domestic industry structures so justify it. This

provision does not prevent the presentation of more detailed non-confidential summaries.

ARTICLE 6.12

The period between the date of publication of the decision to initiate the investigation and the

publication of the final decision shall not exceed 1 (one) year. No bilateral safeguard measures shall

be applied in case the-timeframe is not observed by the competent investigating authorities.

ARTICLE 6.13

Each State Party shall establish or maintain transparent, effective and equitable procedures for the

impartial and reasonable application of bilateral safeguard measures, in compliance with this

Chapter.

SECTION D

PROVISIONAL BILATERAL SAFEGUARDS

ARTICLE 6.14

In critical circumstances, where delay may cause damage which would be difficult to repair, a State
Party, after due notification, may apply a provisional safeguard measure pursuant to a preliminary
determination that there is clear evidence that increased preferential imports have caused or are
threatening to cause serious injury. The duration of the provisional measure shall not exceed 200
(two hundred) days, during which period the requirements of this Chapter shall be met. If the final
determination concludes that there was no serious injury or threat thereof to the domestic industry
caused by imports under preferential terms, the increased tariff or provisional guarantee, if collected
or imposed under provisional measures, shall be promptly refunded, according to the laws and

regulations of the relevant State Party.

SECTION E

PUBLIC NOTICE

ARTICLE 6.15

The public notice of the initiation of an investigation for bilateral safeguard measures shall include

the following information:

(a) the name of the petitioner;

(b) the complete description of the imported product under investigation, and its classification

under the Harmonised System;

(c) the deadline for the request for hearings and the venue where hearings shall be held;

(d) the deadline to register as an interested party and for the submission of information,

statements and other documents;

(e) the address where the request or other documents related to the investigation can be

9

examined;

(f) the name, address and e-mail address or telephone number of the institution which can

provide further information; and

(g) a summary of the facts upon which the initiation of the investigation was based, including
data on imports that have supposedly increased in absolute or relative terms to total
production and analysis of the domestic industry situation based on all the elements conveyed
in the request.

ARTICLE 6.16

1. The public notice of the decision to apply a provisional bilateral safeguard measure, to apply

or not or to extend a definitive bilateral safeguard measure shall include the following information:

(a) the complete description of the product subject to the preferential safeguard measure, and its

tariff classification under the Harmonised System;

(b) information and evidence leading to the decision,

(i) _ the increasing or increased preferential imports, if it is the case;

(11) the situation of the domestic industry, including, in the case of an extension of the

bilateral safeguard measure, evidence that the domestic industry concerned is adjusting;
(111) the existence of a causal link between the increased preferential imports of the goods
concerned and the serious injury or threat thereof to the domestic industry, if it is the
case; and
(iv) in the case of preliminary determination, the existence of critical circumstances.:

(c) other reasoned findings and conclusions on all relevant issues of fact and law;

(d) a precise description of the measure to be adopted, if it is the case; and

10

(e)

(a)

(b)

2.

the date of entry into force of the measure and its duration and, if applicable, a timetable for

progressive liberalisation of the measure, if it is the case.

SECTION F

NOTIFICATIONS AND CONSULTATIONS

ARTICLE 6.17

The importing State Party shall notify the exporting State Party of:

the decision to initiate the investigation under this Chapter;

the decision to apply a provisional bilateral safeguard measure;

the decision to apply or not or to extend a definitive bilateral safeguard measure; and

the decision to modify a bilateral safeguard measure previously undertaken.

The decision shall be notified by the importing State Party as soon as possible and shall be

accompanied by the appropriate public notice. In the case of a decision to initiate an investigation, a

copy of the request to initiate the investigation shall be included in the notification.

1.

ARTICLE 6.18

When a State Party has determined that the conditions to impose definitive measures are met,

it should notify and at the same time invite the other State Party for consultations.

2.

The notification and invitation for consultations referred to in paragraph | shall be made at

least 30 (thirty) days before definitive measures are expected to come into force. No definitive

measures shall be applied in the absence of notification.

11

(a)

(b)

(d)

(e)

3.

The notification provided in paragraph | shall include:

the data and objective information demonstrating the existence of serious injury or threat of

serious injury to the domestic industry caused by the increased preferential imports;

complete description of the imported product subject to the measure, and its classification

under the Harmonised System;

description of the measure proposed;

the date of entry into force of the measure and its duration; and

the period for consultations.

The objective of the consultations referred to in paragraph | shall be a mutual knowledge of

the public facts and the exchange of opinions, aimed at reaching a mutually satisfactory solution. If

no satisfactory solution is reached within 30 (thirty) days of the notification under paragraph 1, a

State Party may apply the measure at the end of the thirty-day period. Should this be the case, the

State Parties shall discuss adequate means of trade compensation for the adverse effects of the

measure on their trade.

4.

At any stage of the investigation, the notified State Party may request consultations with the

other State Party, or any additional information that it considers necessary.

12

CHAPTER 7

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

ARTICLE 7.1

Scope

This Chapter applies to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the State Parties, that may,

directly or indirectly, affect trade between the Parties.

ARTICLE 7.2

General provisions

1. Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, the SPS Agreement applies between the State

Parties and is incorporated into and form part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
2. In implementing this Chapter, each State Party shall take into account the relevant guidance of
the WTO Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (hereinafter referred to as "WTO SPS
Committee") and base its SPS measures on international standards, guidelines, and
recommendations adopted by the international organisations identified in the SPS Agreement.
ARTICLE 7.3
Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) facilitate trade between the Parties within the scope of sanitary and phytosanitary measures

while protecting human, animal or plant life or health in the territories of the State Parties;
1

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(a)

(b)

reinforce and build on the SPS Agreement and cooperate on the further implementation of the

SPS Agreement;

strengthen communication, consultation and cooperation between the Parties, and particularly

between the State Parties' competent authorities and contact point;

ensure that sanitary or phytosanitary measures implemented by a State Party are science-

based, taking into account risk analysis principles;

ensure that sanitary or phytosanitary measures implemented by a State Party do not create

unjustified obstacles to trade;

enhance transparency in and understanding of the application of each State Party's sanitary

and phytosanitary measures;

encourage the development and adoption of international standards, guidelines and

recommendations, by the international organisations identified in the SPS Agreement and

promote their implementation by the State Parties; and

provide effective means to resolve any sanitary and phytosanitary concerns that may affect

trade between the Parties.

ARTICLE 7.4

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the following apply:

the definitions contained in Annex A of the SPS Agreement;

the definitions adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (hereinafter referred to as the

"Codex");

(c) the definitions adopted by the World Organisation for Animal Health (hereinafter referred to
as the "WOAH");

(d) the definitions adopted by the International Plant Protection Convention (hereinafter referred

to as the "IPPC");

(e) "import check" means an inspection, examination, sampling, review of documentation, test or
procedure, including laboratory, organoleptic or identity, carried out at the border by an
importing State Party or its representative to determine if a consignment complies with the

sanitary and phytosanitary requirements of the importing State Party; and

(f) "international standards, guidelines and recommendations" means documents adopted by the

relevant international organisations identified in the SPS Agreement.

2. In the event of an inconsistency between the definitions of the SPS Agreement and the
definitions agreed by both Parties or the definitions adopted by Codex, WOAH and IPPC, the

definitions set out in the SPS Agreement shall prevail.

ARTICLE 7.5

Adaptation to regional conditions, including pest- or disease-free areas and areas of low pest or

disease prevalence

1. The State Parties shall act in accordance with Article 6 (Adaption to Regional Conditions,
Including Pest-or Disease- Free Areas and Areas of Low Pest or Disease Prevalence) of the SPS
Agreement, guidelines adopted by the WTO SPS Committee by Decision G/SPS/48 and the
standards, guidelines and recommendations of the IPPC and WOAH, to facilitate the recognition of

the pest- or disease-free areas and areas of low pest or disease prevalence.

2. The State Parties shall accept their respective disease-free areas, zones or compartments

recognised by the WOAH, expeditiously and without undue delay.

3. The exporting State Party shall provide appropriate science-based and technical information

to objectively demonstrate to the importing State Party that its territory, or any region or regions of
3

its territory, are pest or disease-free areas or areas of low pest or disease prevalence and that such

condition is likely to remain.

4. | When an importing State Party receives a request for the recognition of a pest- or disease-free
area or an area of low pest or disease prevalence from the exporting State Party, it shall initiate an

assessment and present a timeframe for the recognition process.

5. If the assessment results in recognition, the importing State Party shall communicate this
recognition to the exporting State Party in writing without undue delay, and shall apply these

conditions to trade within a reasonable period of time.
6. — If the assessment does not result in recognition, the importing State Party shall provide the
exporting State Party with the rationale for its decision including any scientific and technical
reasons in writing without undue delay. The importing State Party will allow the exporting State
Party to provide more information or clarifications with the purpose of reviewing the decision.
7. The State Parties shall promote cooperation of their competent authorities in order to facilitate
the implementation of this Article.

ARTICLE 7.6

Equivalence

1. The State Parties recognise equivalence as an important means to facilitate trade.
2. The determination of equivalence between the State Parties shall be established in accordance
with the Decisions adopted by the WTO SPS Committee and based on the standards, guidelines and

recommendations adopted by the relevant international organisations of the SPS Agreement.

3. The State Parties may recognise the equivalence of a measure, a group of measures, or a

system for a product or group of products.

4. The importing State Party shall recognise the equivalence of a sanitary or phytosanitary
measure if the exporting State Party objectively demonstrates to the importing State Party that the

exporting State Party's measure:

(a) achieves the same level of protection as the importing State Party's measure; or

(b) has the same effect in achieving the objective as the importing State Party's measure.

5. On request of the exporting State Party, the importing State Party shall explain the objective
and rationale of its sanitary or phytosanitary measure and clearly identify the risk the sanitary or

phytosanitary measure is intended to address.

6. The exporting State Party shall communicate its interest in an equivalence determination and
provide appropriate science-based and technical information with a view to objectively

demonstrating the equivalence.

7. When an importing State Party receives a request for an equivalence assessment and
determines that the information provided by the exporting State Party is sufficient, it shall initiate
the equivalence assessment according to a timeframe established between the importing and

exporting parties.

8. | When an importing State Party commences an equivalence assessment, that State Party shall
promptly, on request of the exporting State Party, explain its equivalence process and timetable for
making the equivalence determination and, if the determination results in recognition, for enabling

trade.

9. In determining the equivalence of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, an importing State
Party shall take into account available knowledge, information and relevant experience, as well as

the regulatory competence of the exporting State Party.

10. Upon request of the exporting State Party, the importing State Party shall inform the

exporting State Party of the status of the equivalence assessment.

11. If the importing State Party requires an "on-site" inspection to verify the equivalence, and this

request is duly justified, the exporting State Party shall organise such inspections.
5

12. When an importing State Party recognises the equivalence of an exporting State Party 's
specific sanitary or phytosanitary measure, group of measures or a system for a product or group of
products, the importing State Party shall communicate this to the exporting State Party in writing

without undue delay and shall apply this recognition within a reasonable period of time.

13. If an equivalence determination does not result in recognition by the importing State Party,
the importing State Party shall provide the exporting State Party with the rationale for its decision

including any scientific and technical reasons for the decision, in writing and without undue delay.

ARTICLE 7.7

Risk analysis

1. The State Parties recognise the importance of ensuring that their respective sanitary and

phytosanitary measures are based on scientific principles.

2. Each State Party shall base its sanitary and phytosanitary measures on international standards,
guidelines, and recommendations unless no applicable international standards, guidelines and
recommendations exist, or if a State Party has established a higher level of sanitary or phytosanitary
protection. In such cases, the State Party shall ensure that its sanitary or phytosanitary measure is
based on an assessment, as appropriate to the circumstances, of the risk to human, animal or plant

life or health.

3. | Recognising the State Parties' rights and obligations under the relevant provisions of the SPS

Agreement, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a State Party from:

(a) establishing the level of protection it determines to be appropriate;

(b) establishing or maintaining an approval procedure that requires a risk analysis to be carried

out before the State Party grants a product access to its market; or

(c) adopting or maintaining a sanitary or phytosanitary measure on a provisional basis.

4. When conducting its risk analysis, each State Party shall:

(a) take into account relevant guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards,

guidelines and recommendations;

(b) ensure that its sanitary and phytosanitary measures do not arbitrarily or unjustifiably
discriminate between State Parties where identical or similar conditions prevail, including

between its own territory and that of other State Parties;

(c) ensure that each risk assessment it conducts is appropriate to the circumstances of the risk at

issue and takes into account reasonably available and relevant scientific information; and

(d) ensure that it is documented.

5. Each State Party shall consider and select risk management options that are not more trade
restrictive! than required to achieve the level of protection that the State Party has determined to be
appropriate, including taking no measure if that would achieve the State Party's appropriate level of

protection.

6. | When the importing State Party makes a risk analysis for a new product, if there are
similarities with other products and associated risk from the same exporting State Party or the other
State Parties, the importing State Party shall be able to take into account previous risk assessments

where applicable, in order to simplify the process.

7.  If an importing State Party requires a risk analysis to evaluate a request from an exporting
State Party to authorise importation of a good of that exporting State Party, the importing State
Party shall provide, on request of the exporting State Party, an explanation of the information
required for the risk assessment. On receipt of the required information from the exporting State

Party, the importing State Party shall endeavour to facilitate the evaluation without undue delay.

For greater certainty, a risk management option is not more trade restrictive than required
unless there is another option that is reasonably available, taking into account technical and
economic feasibility, that achieves the appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary
protection and is significantly less restrictive to trade.

7

8. On request of the exporting State Party, the importing State Party shall inform the progress of

a specific risk analysis request, and of any delay that may occur during the process.

9. If the importing State Party, as a result of a risk analysis, adopts a sanitary or phytosanitary
measure that allows trade to commence or resume, the importing State Party shall implement the

measure within a reasonable period of time.

10. If a State Party adopts or maintains a provisional sanitary or phytosanitary measure, in case
where relevant scientific evidence is insufficient, the State Party shall without undue delay and in

any case no longer than 6 (six) months:

(a) seek to obtain the additional information necessary for a more objective risk assessment;

(b) take into consideration any information provided by the other State Party in response to the

provisional measure;

(c) complete the risk assessment after obtaining the requisite information; and

(d) review and, if appropriate, revise the provisional measure in light of the risk assessment.

11. Without prejudice to Article 7.12 (Emergency measures), a State Party shall not stop the
importation of a good of another State Party solely for the reason that the importing State Party is
undertaking a review of its sanitary or phytosanitary measure, if the importing State Party permitted

the importation of that good of the other State Party when the review was initiated.

ARTICLE 7.8

Audits?

For greater certainty, nothing in this Article prevents an importing State Party from
performing an inspection of a facility for the purposes of determining if the facility conforms
with: (i) the importing State Party's sanitary or phytosanitary requirements; or (11) sanitary or
phytosanitary measures that the importing State Party has determined to be equivalent.

8

1. | To determine an exporting State Party's ability to provide required assurances and meet the
sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the importing State Party, the importing State Party shall
have the right, subject to this Article, to audit the exporting State Party’s competent authorities and
associated or designated inspection systems. That audit may include an assessment of the control
systems and programmes including, if appropriate, reviews of the inspection and audit programmes;

and on-site inspections of facilities or establishments.

2. In undertaking an audit, a State Party shall take into account relevant guidance of the WTO

SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines and recommendations.

3. An audit shall be systems-based and designed to check the effectiveness of the regulatory

controls of the competent authorities of the exporting State Party.

4. | When an exporting State Party receives a request for an audit to verify compliance with
sanitary or phytosanitary requirements by an importing State Party, the importing State Party shall

provide the rationale for the said audit.

5. In the case of an on-site inspection, it shall be limited exclusively to the verification of what is

technically necessary, without causing undue delays and unnecessary costs.

6. Prior to the commencement of an audit, the importing State Party and exporting State Party
involved shall discuss the rationale and decide: the objectives and scope of the audit; the criteria or
requirements against which the exporting State Party will be assessed; and the itinerary and
procedures for conducting the audit. The exporting State Party shall facilitate the organisation and

the itinerary to the audit.

7. The importing State Party shall provide a report setting out its conclusions in writing to the
exporting State Party within 90 (ninety) working days. The report shall clearly document any
corrective actions, timeframes, and follow-up procedures. The importing State Party shall take into
consideration, without undue delay, any information provided by the exporting State Party.
Comments made by the exporting State Party shall be attached to and, where appropriate, included

in the report, without undue delay.

8. | A decision or action taken by the importing State Party as a result of the audit shall be

supported by objective evidence and data that can be verified, taking into account the importing
9

State Party's knowledge of, relevant experience with, and confidence in, the exporting State Party.

This objective evidence and data shall be provided to the exporting State Party on request.

9. The costs incurred by the importing State Party shall be borne by the importing State Party,

unless both parties agree otherwise.

10. The importing State Party and the exporting State Party shall each ensure that procedures are
in place to prevent the disclosure of confidential information that is acquired during the audit

process.

11. For animal products, animal by-products, live animals and genetic materials, when the result
of the audit of the official control system of the competent authority of the exporting State Party is
favourable, the importing State Party shall notify to the exporting State Party, without undue delay,
the specific category or categories of products, facilities and establishments, which the importing
State Party has authorised. The import of such products shall be based on one of the following

approval procedures of facilities or establishments, along with the rationale for its choice:

(a) individual facilities or establishments are approved without prior inspection. The exporting
State Party shall inform the list of facilities or establishments to be approved. The competent
authority of the exporting State Party shall guarantee that the facilities or establishments from
the list meet the sanitary requirements of the importing State Party. The importing State Party
shall notify the exporting State Party of its acceptance or rejection of any facility or
establishment without undue delay. The exporting State Party shall suspend or withdraw the
export approval of those facilities or establishments that do not comply with the sanitary
requirements of the importing State Party and shall promptly notify it to the importing State
Party; or

(b) only specific facilities or establishments are approved to export to the importing State Party
upon compliance with its sanitary import requirements. For additional facilities or
establishments to be considered for approval, the exporting State Party shall provide the
relevant information as required by the importing State Party for further assessment. The
importing State Party may conduct on-site inspections where necessary. The evaluation
procedure shall be done in a reasonable period of time, and the exchange of information
between the State Parties including the outcome of the evaluation shall be done without undue

delay.
10

12. After a reasonable period of time, as it gains more confidence in the exporting State Party's
system, the importing State Party may unilaterally change the approval procedure from
subparagraph (b) to subparagraph (a) of paragraph 11. Alternatively, the exporting State Party may
request this reassessment from the importing State Party and provide any relevant information to
support its request. In this reassessment, the rationale used for the original decision, the existing
risks, the number of establishments already approved and notifications that have occurred since the
original assessment and the additional information provided by the exporting State Party should be

considered.

13. In accordance with international standards, guidelines and recommendations, when the result
of the audit of the official phytosanitary system of the competent authority of the exporting State
Party is favourable, the exporting State Party may provide the list of places of production registered

for export, whenever available.

14. When the result of the audit of the official control system of the competent authority of the
exporting State Party is unfavourable, the importing State Party shall inform without undue delay
the exporting State Party of any denial of approval of places of production facilities or
establishments, providing the scientific justification and indicating the corrective actions and
timeframe for implementation, which the exporting State Party should implement for the re-

evaluation of the importing State Party.
ARTICLE 7.9
Import checks?
1. The application of import checks by the importing State Party shall not become disguised

restrictions on trade between the Parties and shall be carried out in accordance with the SPS

Agreement and the international standards, guidelines and recommendations.

3 For greater certainty, the State Parties recognise that import checks are one of many tools
available to assess compliance with an importing Party's sanitary and phytosanitary measures.
11

2. Each State Party shall ensure that its import programmes are based on the risks associated

with importations, and that import checks are carried out without undue delay‘.

3. A State Party shall make available to another State Party, upon request, information on its

import procedures.

4. An importing State Party shall provide to another State Party, upon request, information
regarding the analytical methods, quality controls, sampling procedures and facilities that the
importing State Party has used to test a good. The importing State Party shall ensure that any testing
is carried out using appropriate and validated methods in a facility that operates under a quality
assurance programme that is consistent with international laboratory standards. The importing State
Party shall maintain physical or electronic documentation regarding the identification, collection,
sampling, transportation and storage of the test sample, and the analytical methods used on the test

sample.

5. In the event that import checks demonstrate that products do not conform with the relevant
import requirements of the importing State Party, any action taken by the importing State Party
should be proportionate to the sanitary and phytosanitary risk associated with the import of the non-

compliant product.

6. | Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, an importing State Party normally shall not
suspend trade with another State Party on the basis that one consignment has failed to conform to its

SPS requirements.

7. If an importing State Party takes an action regarding the importation of a good of another
State Party on the basis of an adverse result of an import check, the importing State Party shall
provide a notification, where practicable by electronic means, about the adverse result to at least
one of the following: the importer or its agent; the exporter; the manufacturer; or the exporting State

Party.

8. If an importing State Party determines that there is a significant non-conformity with a

sanitary or phytosanitary measure; or a sustained, or a recurring pattern of non-conformity with a

For greater certainty, nothing in this Article prohibits a State Party from performing import
checks to obtain information to assess risk or to determine the need for, develop or
periodically review a risk-based import programme.

12

sanitary or phytosanitary measure, the importing State Party shall notify the exporting State Party of

the non-conformity.

9. | When the importing State Party provides a notification pursuant to paragraph 8, it shall:

(a) include:

(i) | the reason for the non-conformity and the action taken;

(11) the legal basis or authorisation for the action; and

(111) information on the status of the affected goods and, if appropriate, on their disposition;

and

(b) transmit the notification by electronic means, if practicable and not already been provided

through another channel.

10. Upon request, an importing State Party shall provide to the exporting State Party available
information on goods from the exporting State Party that were found not to conform to a sanitary or

phytosanitary measure of the importing State Party.

ARTICLE 7.10

Certification

1. The State Parties recognise that assurances with respect to sanitary or phytosanitary

requirements may be provided through means other than certificates.

2. In applying certification requirements, an importing State Party shall take into account
relevant guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines and

recommendations.

3. If an importing State Party requires certification for trade in a good, that State Party shall

ensure that the certification requirement is applied only to the extent necessary to protect human,
13

animal or plant life or health. The importing State Party shall limit the attestations and information
it requires on the certificates to what is essential to provide assurances to the importing State Party

that its sanitary or phytosanitary requirements have been met.

4. An importing State Party should provide to another State Party, upon request, the rationale for

any attestations or information that it requires to be included on a certificate.

5. The State Parties may agree to work cooperatively to develop model certificates to
accompany specific goods traded between the Parties, taking into account relevant guidance of the

WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines and recommendations.

6. The State Parties shall promote the implementation of electronic certification and other
technologies to facilitate trade, taking into account the international standards, guidelines and

recommendations, when applicable.

ARTICLE 7.11
Transparency?

1. The State Parties recognise the value of sharing information about their sanitary and
phytosanitary measures on an on-going basis. The State Parties shall exchange information on
issues related to the development and application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures affecting
trade between them as well as on scientific evidence or new scientific information available that is

relevant to this Chapter, upon request.

2. Each State Party shall observe the notification provisions of the SPS Agreement and the
relevant guidance of the WTO SPS Committee and international standards, guidelines and
recommendations. A State Party shall be deemed to have fulfilled their notification obligations

pursuant to this Article if it has met their WTO notification obligations.

S For greater certainty, this Article applies only to a sanitary or phytosanitary measure that
constitutes a sanitary or phytosanitary regulation for the purposes of Annex B of the SPS
Agreement.

14

3. A State Party shall notify a proposed sanitary or phytosanitary measure that may have an
effect on the trade of another State Party, including any that conforms to international standards,
guidelines or recommendations, by using the WTO SPS notification submission system as a means

of notifying the other State Parties.

4. Unless urgent problems of human, animal or plant life or health protection arise or threaten to
arise, or the measure is of a trade-facilitating nature, a State Party shall normally allow at least 60
(sixty) days for interested persons and other Parties to provide written comments on the proposed
measure after it makes the notification pursuant to paragraph 3. If feasible and appropriate, the State

Party should allow more than 60 (sixty) days.

5. The State Party, in accordance with its own internal procedures, shall make available to the
public, by electronic means in an official journal or on websites, the proposed sanitary or

phytosanitary measure notified pursuant to paragraph 3, as well as the adopted measures.

6. If a State Party proposes a sanitary or phytosanitary measure which does not conform to an
international standard, guideline or recommendation, the State Party shall provide to another State
Party, upon request, and to the extent permitted by the confidentiality and privacy requirements of
the State Party's laws and regulations, the relevant information that the State Party considered in

developing the proposed measure.

7. A State Party that proposes to adopt a sanitary or phytosanitary measure shall discuss with
another State Party, upon request and if appropriate and feasible, any scientific or trade concerns
that the other State Party may raise regarding the proposed measure and the availability of

alternative, less trade-restrictive approaches for achieving the objective of the measure.

8. An exporting State Party shall notify the importing State Party through the contact points
referred to in Article 7.16 (Competent authorities and contact points) or the already established
communication channels with the competent authority of the importing State Party without undue

delay:

(a) if it has knowledge of a significant sanitary or phytosanitary risk related to the export of a

good from its territory;

15

(b) of urgent situations where a change in animal or plant health status in the territory of the

exporting State Party may affect current trade;

(c) of significant changes in the status of a regionalised pest or disease;

(d) of new scientific findings of importance which affect the regulatory response with respect to

food safety, pests or diseases; and

(e) of significant changes in food safety, pest or disease management, control or eradication

policies or practices that may affect current trade.

9. If feasible and appropriate, a State Party should provide an interval of more than 6 (six)
months between the date it publishes a final sanitary or phytosanitary measure and the date on
which the measure takes effect, unless the measure is intended to address an urgent problem of

human, animal or plant life or health protection or the measure is of a trade-facilitating nature.

10. A State Party shall provide to another State Party without undue delay, upon request, all

sanitary or phytosanitary measures related to the importation of a good into that State Party's

territory.
ARTICLE 7.12
Emergency measures
1. If a State Party adopts an emergency measure that is necessary to address an urgent problem

of human, animal or plant life or health protection that arises or threatens to arise, the State Party
shall promptly notify the affected State Party of that measure through the relevant contact point
referred to in Article 7.16 (Competent authorities and contact points) or the already established
communication channels with the competent authority of the affected State Party. The State Party
that adopts the emergency measure shall take into consideration any information provided by other

State Parties in response to the notification.

16

2. If a State Party adopts an emergency measure, it shall review the scientific basis of that

measure within 6 (six) months and make available the results of the review to any State Party upon

request.
ARTICLE 7.13
Cooperation
1. The Parties shall explore opportunities for further cooperation, collaboration and information

exchange between the State Parties on sanitary and phytosanitary matters of mutual interest,
consistent with this Chapter. Those opportunities may include trade facilitation initiatives and
technical assistance. The State Parties shall cooperate to facilitate the implementation of this

Chapter. Such cooperation shall be based on mutually agreed terms and conditions.
2. The State Parties shall cooperate and may jointly identify work on sanitary and phytosanitary
matters with the goal of eliminating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

ARTICLE 7.14

Information exchange

A State Party may request relevant and reasonable information from another State Party on any
matter arising under this Chapter. A State Party that receives a request pursuant to this paragraph
shall provide that information, within a mutually agreed timeframe, in English and preferably by
electronic means.

ARTICLE 7.15

Technical consultations

1. | Where a State Party has serious concerns regarding a risk to human, animal or plant life or

health, affecting commodities for which trade takes place, consultations regarding the situation
17

shall, upon request, take place as soon as possible. In this case, each State Party shall endeavour to

provide in due time all necessary information to avoid disruption in trade.

2. Consultations referred to in paragraph | may be held by e-mail, video or telephone

conference, or any means agreed between the State Parties. The requesting State Party shall ensure

the preparation of the minutes of the consultation.

ARTICLE 7.16

Competent authorities and contact points

1. | Competent authority means a government body of each State Party responsible for the

implementation of the provisions included in this Chapter.

2. Each State Party shall designate a contact point which shall have the responsibility for

coordinating the operation of this Chapter.

3. Within 60 (sixty) days after the date of entry into force of this Agreement for each State Party,
that State Party shall notify to the other State Parties:

(a) the contact points for information exchange in accordance with this Chapter; and

(b) their designated competent authorities and the areas of responsibility of such competent

authorities.

4. The State Parties shall inform each other of any change to their contact points or any

significant change in the structure or competence of their competent authorities.

5. The functions of the competent authorities and the designated contact points shall include:

(a) monitoring the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) when necessary, reviewing this Chapter and recommending any potential amendments;

18

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

addressing any issue that any State Party raises on matters covered by this Chapter in a timely

manner;

encouraging cooperation among the State Parties on matters covered by this Chapter;

exchanging information on matters covered by this Chapter;

facilitating technical discussions on matters covered by this Chapter and trade-facilitating

initiatives; and

exchanging information in the field of private standards in order to facilitate the

understanding of private standards between the State Parties.

19

CHAPTER 8

TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE

ARTICLE 8.1
Objective

The objective of this Chapter is to facilitate trade in goods between the Parties by, among others,
eliminating unnecessary technical barriers to trade, enhancing transparency, and promoting greater
cooperation and good regulatory practices.

ARTICLE 8.2

Scope of application and definitions

1. | This Chapter shall apply to the preparation, adoption and application of standards, technical
regulations, and conformity assessment procedures of the Parties, that may affect trade in goods

between the Parties.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions under Annex | of the TBT Agreement shall
apply.

3. This Chapter shall not apply to technical specifications prepared by a governmental entity for

its production or consumption requirements.

4. This Chapter shall not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

ARTICLE 8.3

Incorporation of the TBT Agreement

The State Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other under the

TBT Agreement, which is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

ARTICLE 8.4

Cooperation on trade facilitating initiatives

1. The Parties recognise the importance of intensifying cooperation in the field of standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures with a view to increasing mutual
understanding of their respective systems and eliminating unnecessary technical barriers to trade
and facilitating access to their respective markets. In this regard, the Parties shall work towards the
identification, promotion, development and implementation, as appropriate, of trade facilitating

initiatives, on a case-by-case basis.

2. A Party may propose to another Party such joint trade facilitating initiatives on products or

sectors in areas covered by this Chapter. These proposals, which shall be transmitted through the

contact points designated under Article 8.12 (Contact points), may include amongst others:

(a) information exchanges on regulatory approaches and practices;

(b) facilitating greater alignment or harmonisation with international standards through the
greater use of relevant international standards, guides and recommendations as the bases for
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

(c) promoting the use of accreditation to assess the competence of conformity assessment bodies;

(d) mutually or unilaterally recognising and accepting results of conformity assessment

procedures; or

(e) promoting equivalence of technical regulations.

3. A Party shall, on request of another Party, consider any trade facilitating initiative proposal
under this Article and reply to the request within a reasonable period of time. As part of the process,
a preliminary joint analysis of the trade facilitating initiative proposal may be undertaken in order to
identify any elements, data or evidence that may support the negotiation of a trade facilitating
initiative. Proposals for a trade facilitating initiative shall be made in writing. If the requested Party

rejects a proposal, it shall explain the reasons for its decision to the requesting Party.

4. | When mutually agreed and necessary for the implementation of the initiatives under this
Article, the Parties shall facilitate the access of technical teams of another Party to demonstrate their

conformity assessment schemes and system in order to increase mutual understanding.

5. The Parties shall encourage the participation of competent regulatory and governmental

authorities, at the national or regional level.

6. The terms of the work envisaged in this Article will be defined by the Parties engaged in such
work, when needed. This may include establishing ad hoc working groups. In order to benefit from
non-governmental perspectives on matters related to this Article, each Party may, as appropriate
and in accordance with its rules and procedures, consult with stakeholders and other interested

persons.

7. The results of the understandings reached under this Article should be incorporated into an

appropriate instrument, depending on the subject matter and the agreed tool.
8. Further to paragraph 7, if the Parties decide that an Annex to this Chapter is the appropriate
instrument to incorporate the results of a trade facilitating initiative, the Annex shall constitute an
integral part of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 8.5
Standards
1. The Parties recognise the important role that international standards, guides and

recommendations can play in supporting greater regulatory alignment, good regulatory practice and

reducing unnecessary barriers to trade.

2. In this respect, and further to Article 2 (2.4) (Preparation, Adoption and Application of
Technical Regulations by Central Government Bodies), Article 5 (5.4) (Procedures for Assessment
of Conformity) and Annex 3 (Code of Good Practice for the Preparation, Adoption and Application
of Standards) of the TBT Agreement, to determine whether an international standard, guide or
recommendation within the meaning of Article 2 (Preparation, Adoption and Application of
Technical Regulations by Central Government Bodies), Article 5 Procedures for Assessment of
Conformity) and Annex 3 (Code of Good Practice for the Preparation, Adoption and Application of
Standards) of the TBT Agreement exists, each Party shall apply the Decisions and
Recommendations adopted by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade Since 1 January
1995 (G/TBT/1/Rev.14), as may be revised, issued by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers
to Trade.

3. Recognising their responsibility under Article 4 (4.1) (Preparation, Adoption and Application
of Standards) of the TBT Agreement, the Parties shall ensure, in cases where their standardising
bodies are governmental, that they accept and comply with the Code of Good Practice for the
Preparation, Adoption and Application of Standards in Annex 3 (Code of Good Practice for the
Preparation, Adoption and Application of Standards) of the TBT Agreement. For non-governmental

bodies, the Parties shall take all reasonable measures to ensure similar acceptance and compliance.

4. | Whenever a Party's standardising bodies, including its regional standardising bodies, develop
national or regional standards, for which modifications of contents of the relevant international

standards were necessary, upon request of another Party, Parties shall encourage their standardising
bodies, as well as regional standardising bodies, to provide what the differences in the contents are,

and reason(s) for those differences.

5. The Parties shall encourage the standardising bodies in their territories, as well as the regional
standardising bodies of which the Parties or their standardising bodies within their territories are

Members, to:

(a) use relevant international standards as a basis for the standards they develop, except where
such international standards would be ineffective or inappropriate, for instance because of an
insufficient level of protection or fundamental climatic or geographical factors or fundamental

technological problems;

(b)

(c)

(a)

(b)

(c)

1.

participate in the preparation of international standards by relevant international standardising

bodies; and

avoid duplication of or overlap with the work of international standardising bodies.

The Parties undertake to promote the exchange of information on:

their use of standards or the relevant parts of them as a basis for their technical regulations;

each other's standardisation processes and the use of international or regional standards as a

basis for their national standards; and

cooperation agreements implemented by a Party on standardisation, provided such

information can be made available to the public.

ARTICLE 8.6

Technical regulations

The Parties agree to make best use of good regulatory practices with regard to the preparation,

adoption and application of technical regulations, as provided for in the TBT Agreement, and agree

to:

(a)

(b)

use relevant international standards or the relevant parts of them to the extent provided in
Article 2(2.4) (Preparation, Adoption and Application of Technical Regulations by Central
Government Bodies) of the TBT Agreement as a basis for their technical regulations. Where a
Party does not use such international standards, or their relevant parts, as a basis for its
technical regulations which may have a significant effect on trade, it shall, upon request of

another Party, explain the reasons for its decision.

in implementing Article 2(2.2) (Preparation, Adoption and Application of Technical
Regulations by Central Government Bodies) of the TBT Agreement, in accordance with their
respective rules and procedures, endeavour to carry out the regulatory impact analysis of

planned technical regulations and consider available alternatives and the potential impacts on
5

micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, in order to ensure that the proposed technical
regulations to be adopted are not more trade-restrictive than necessary to fulfil a legitimate

objective.

2. For the purposes of applying Article 2(2.12) (Preparation, Adoption and Application of
Technical Regulations by Central Government Bodies) of the TBT Agreement, the term "reasonable
interval" means normally a period of not less than 6 (six) months, except when this would be

ineffective in fulfilling the legitimate objectives pursued by the technical regulation.

3. For greater certainty, a Party may decide to set an interval of less than 6 (six) months between
the publication of a measure and its entry into force in certain circumstances, including those where
the measure is trade facilitative or is addressing an urgent problem of safety, health, environmental

protection, or national security.

4. Each State Party shall ensure that goods, once placed on the market and fully compliant with
the relevant technical regulations and its conformity assessment procedures, may freely move

within its territory without any further technical requirement related to this Chapter.

5. | When a State Party detains at the point of entry a good originating in the territory of another

State Party, due to non-fulfilment of a technical regulation, it must notify the importer, or, where

applicable, its agent, as soon as possible of the reasons for the detention.

ARTICLE 8.7

Conformity assessment procedures

1. The Parties recognise that a broad range of mechanisms exist to facilitate the acceptance of

results of the conformity assessments carried out in the territory of another State Party, including:

(a) agreements on the mutual recognition of the results of conformity assessment procedures,
with respect to specific technical regulations, performed by bodies located in the territory of

the State Parties concerned;

(b) use of accreditation to qualify conformity assessment bodies;
6

(c) government approval or designation of conformity assessment bodies;

(d) unilateral recognition of the results of conformity assessment procedures performed in another

State Party's territory;

(e) voluntary arrangements between the conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the State

Parties;

(f) acceptance by the importing State Party of a supplier's declaration of conformity; or

(g) the use of regional or international multilateral recognition agreements and arrangements of

which the Parties concerned are parties.

2. With respect to the mechanisms listed in paragraph 1, the Parties recognise that the choice of
the appropriate mechanisms in a given regulatory context depends on the legal framework of each
State Party and a variety of factors, such as the product and sector involved, the volume and
direction of trade, the legitimate objectives pursued, and the risks of non-fulfilment of those

objectives.

3. | Upon request by a State Party, the Parties concerned may decide to engage in consultations
with a view to defining sectoral initiatives regarding the use of conformity assessment procedures or
the facilitation of acceptance of conformity assessment results that are appropriate for the respective

sectors, pursuant to Article 8.4 (Cooperation on trade facilitating initiatives).

4. When a State Party allows the participation of conformity assessment bodies located in the
territory of another State Party in its conformity assessment procedures, such State Party shall apply
the same or equivalent criteria and other conditions to accredit, approve, license, or otherwise
recognise such conformity assessment bodies, on terms no less favourable than those it accords to

conformity assessment bodies in its own territory.

5. Paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not preclude a State Party from undertaking conformity assessment
in relation to a specific product solely within specified government bodies located in its own
territory or in another State Party's territory, in a manner consistent with its obligations under the

TBT Agreement.

6.

If a State Party requires non-governmental third party conformity assessment body or bodies

to carry out a conformity assessment procedure, the State Party shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

7.

use international standards for accreditation and conformity assessment, as well as

international agreements involving the Parties' accreditation bodies;

where applicable, consider joining, or encourage the State Party's testing, inspection and

certification bodies to join the relevant international agreements or arrangements;

ensure that, insofar as two or more conformity assessment bodies are authorised by a State
Party to carry out conformity assessment procedures required for placing the product on the

market, economic operators may choose among them;
ensure that conformity assessment bodies operate objectively and independently of
manufacturers, importers and distributors in the sense that they carry out their activities with

objectivity and independence of judgment;

ensure that there are no conflicts of interest between the conformity assessment bodies and

accreditation bodies as well as market surveillance authorities; and

make publicly available the bodies that it has recognised to perform such conformity

assessment and relevant information on the scope of each body's designation.

For the purposes of applying Article 5 (5.9) (Procedures for Assessment of Conformity) of the

TBT Agreement, the term "reasonable interval" means normally a period of not less than 6 (six)

months, except when this would be ineffective in fulfilling the legitimate objectives pursued by the

requirements concerning the conformity assessment procedure.

8.

Further to subparagraph 5.2.5 of Article 5 (5.2) (Procedures for Assessment of Conformity)

the TBT Agreement, each State Party shall endeavour to establish any conformity assessment fee

imposed by government authorities of the State Party, in accordance with the approximate cost of

the services rendered.

1.

ARTICLE 8.8

Marking and labelling

The Parties affirm that their technical regulations that include or deal exclusively with

marking or labelling requirements shall comply with Article 2 of the TBT Agreement.

2.

For the purposes of this Agreement, where a Party requires mandatory marking or labelling of

products:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

the Party shall restrict its requirements only to those which are relevant for consumers, users
of the product, regulatory authorities or to indicate the product's conformity with the

mandatory requirements;

where a Party requires, as a precondition for placing on the market, any prior approval,
registration or certification of the markings or labels of products which otherwise comply with
its technical regulations, it shall ensure that the requests submitted by the economic operators

of another Party are decided without undue delay and on a non-discriminatory basis;

where the Party requires the use of a unique identification number by economic operators, the
Party shall ensure that such numbers are issued to the relevant economic operators without

undue delay and on a non-discriminatory basis;
provided that it is not misleading, contradictory or confusing in relation to the importing State
Party's regulatory requirements, and the legitimate objectives under the TBT Agreement are

not compromised, the Party shall permit, in addition to such requirements:

(i) information in other languages in addition to the language required in the importing

State Party of the goods; and

(ii) | internationally-accepted nomenclatures, pictograms, symbols, or graphics; and

the Party, in cases where it considers that legitimate objectives under the TBT Agreement are

not compromised and where applicable:

(i) shall accept that supplementary labelling, and corrections to labelling, take place, where
relevant, in authorised premises (for example in customs warehouses at the point of
import) in the importing State Party prior to the distribution and sale of the product as

an alternative to labelling in the place of origin; and

(11) shall endeavour to accept alternative forms of labelling, such as electronic labels, non-
permanent or detachable labels, or marking or labelling in the accompanying materials

packaged with the product.

ARTICLE 8.9
Transparency

1. Each Party shall publish preferably by electronic means, in a single official journal or website,
all proposals for new technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures and proposals for
amendments to existing technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, and all new
final technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures and final amendments to existing
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, that a Party is required to notify or

publish under the TBT Agreement or this Chapter, and that may have a significant effect on trade.!

2. Each Party shall ensure that its proposals contain sufficient detail about the likely content of
the proposed technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures to enable interested

persons and another Party to assess how their trade interests might be affected.

3. Each Party shall notify proposed technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures
that may have a significant effect on the trade of another State Party according to the procedures
established under Article 2(2.9) (Preparation, Adoption and Application of Technical Regulations
by Central Government Bodies) or Article 5(5.6) (Procedures for Assessment of Conformity) or, if
appropriate, Article 2(2.10) (Preparation, Adoption and Application of Technical Regulations by

Central Government Bodies) or Article 5(5.7) (Procedures for Assessment of Conformity) of the

1 For greater certainty, a Party may comply with this obligation by ensuring that the proposed
and final measures in this paragraph are published on, or otherwise accessible through, the
WTO's official website.

10

TBT Agreement, even when they are in accordance with the technical content of relevant

international standards, guides, or recommendations.

4. For the purposes of determining whether a proposed technical regulation or conformity
assessment procedure may have a significant effect on trade and should be notified in accordance
with Articles 2(2.9) (Preparation, Adoption and Application of Technical Regulations by Central
Government Bodies), 2(2.10) (Preparation, Adoption and Application of Technical Regulations by
Central Government Bodies), 3(3.2) (Preparation, Adoption and Application of Technical
Regulations by Local Government Bodies and Non-Governmental Bodies), 5(5.6) (Procedures for
Assessment of Conformity), 5(5.7) (Procedures for Assessment of Conformity) or 7(7.2)
(Procedures for Assessment of Conformity by Local Government Bodies) of the TBT Agreement or
this Chapter, a Party shall consider, among other things, the relevant Decisions and
Recommendations Adopted by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade Since 1

January 1995 (G/TBT/1/Rev. 14), as may be revised.

5. Each Party shall allow normally 60 (sixty) days, from the date it submits a notification under
paragraph 3, in order to enable another Party or interested persons from another Party to make
written comments on the proposals, except when urgent problems of safety, health, environmental
protection or national security, arise or threaten to arise. Each Party shall consider reasonable

requests of the other Parties to extend the comment period.

6. Each Party shall endeavour to notify final versions of a technical regulation or conformity
assessment procedure as an addendum to the original notification at the same time it is adopted and

made available to the public on a government website.

7. Each Party shall respond in writing to the comments received from another Party during the
consultation period stipulated in the notification, and, whenever possible, no later than the date of

publication of the final version of the technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure.

8. Each Party shall allow, in accordance with its own internal procedures, interested persons of
another Party a reasonable opportunity to provide comments on the development of technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures on terms no less favourable than those that it

accords its own persons.

11

9. Each Party is encouraged to consider methods to provide additional transparency in the
development of technical regulations, standards, and conformity assessment procedures, including

through the use of electronic tools and public outreach or consultations.

10. If a Party has a central government standardising body, the Party shall ensure that the body's

work program, containing the standards it is preparing and the standards it has adopted, is available:
(a) onthe central government standardising body's website; or
(b) in the Party's official gazette.
11. A Party may request relevant and reasonable information or explanation from another Party
on any matter arising under this Chapter. A Party that receives a request under this paragraph shall
endeavour to provide that information and explanation, within a mutually agreed timeframe, in
English and preferably by electronic means.
ARTICLE 8.10

Technical cooperation
1. The Parties recognise the importance of technical cooperation in the fields of standards,
technical regulations, conformity assessment procedures and metrology, with a view to facilitate the
implementation of this Chapter. To this end, when mutually agreed, the Parties may undertake

technical cooperation which may include but are not limited to:

(a) promoting cooperation between the Parties' respective bodies, whether governmental or non-

governmental, with a view to building trust between the these bodies;

(b) promoting regulatory cooperation through the exchange of information, experiences and best

practices;

(c) exchanging views on market surveillance;

12

(d) promoting the exchange of information on different technical regulations and conformity

assessment procedures in force;

(e) promoting and facilitating the Parties' participation in international organisations and other

fora related to the fields covered by this Article; and

(f) promoting and supporting the use and implementation of relevant international standards.

2. Upon request, a Party shall give appropriate consideration to proposals for cooperation

presented under the terms of this Chapter.

ARTICLE 8.11

Technical discussions

1. A Party which considers that a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure of
another Party might have a significant and adverse effect on trade between the State Parties may

request that another Party engage in technical discussions regarding the matter.

2. Upon request of a Party, technical discussions shall be held with the objective of finding a
mutually acceptable solution. The Parties concerned shall discuss the matter identified within 60
(sixty) days, unless otherwise mutually agreed, from the receipt of the request by the contact point
of the requested Party. The technical discussions may be conducted by any method agreed by the

Parties involved in the technical discussions.

3. Following the technical discussions, the Parties may conclude that the issue could be better
addressed through a trade facilitating initiative, in accordance with the provisions of Article 8.4

(Cooperation on trade facilitating initiatives).

4. Unless the Parties that participate in the technical discussions agree otherwise, the discussions
and any information exchanged in the course of the discussions shall be confidential. For greater
certainty, this Article is without prejudice to a Party's rights and obligations under Chapter 18
(Dispute Settlement).

13

1.

ARTICLE 8.12

Contact points

Each Party shall designate a contact point and notify it to the other Parties for matters arising

under this Chapter. A Party shall promptly notify the other Parties of any change of its contact point

or the details of the relevant officials.

2.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

The functions of the designated contact points shall include:

monitoring the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

when necessary, reviewing this Chapter and recommending any potential amendments;

addressing any issue that any Party raises on matters covered by this Chapter in a timely

manner;

encouraging cooperation among the Parties on matters covered by this Chapter;

exchanging information on matters covered by this Chapter;

facilitating technical discussions pursuant to Article 8.11 (Technical discussions) and trade
facilitating initiatives pursuant to Article 8.4 (Cooperation on trade facilitating initiatives), as

appropriate;

exchanging information in the field of private standards in order to facilitate the

understanding of private standards between the Parties; and

carrying out any additional function specified by the Joint Committee.

14

CHAPTER 9

INVESTMENT

ARTICLE 9.1

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

"commercial presence" means any type of business establishment within the territory of

a State Party, for the purpose of performing an economic activity, including through:

(i) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance! of a juridical person; or

(ii) the creation or maintenance? of a branch or a representative office.

"juridical person of a State Party" means a juridical person constituted or otherwise
organised under the laws and regulations of a State Party and engaged in substantive

business operations in the territory of that State Party;

"juridical person" means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised under
applicable laws and regulations, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately
owned or governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint

venture, sole proprietorship or association;

"freely usable currency" means "freely usable currency" as determined by the IMF under

its Articles of Agreement;

For greater certainty, maintenance includes management, conduct and operation.
For greater certainty, maintenance includes management, conduct and operation.

(e) "natural person of a State Party" means a person who, under the laws and regulations of

that State Party, is a national of that State Party.

ARTICLE 9.2

Scope and coverage?

1. | This Chapter applies to measures by a State Party affecting:

(a) juridical persons or natural persons of another State Party in respect of their

4

constitution, acquisition, maintenance* or expansion of a commercial presence within

the territory of the first-mentioned State Party; and

(b) commercial presence of such juridical or natural persons of another State Party within

the territory of the first-mentioned State Party,

such commercial presence being in all sectors, with the exception of services sectors under

the scope of Chapter 10 (Trade in Services).*

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the provisions Article 9.5 (Access to Justice and Due
Process of Law), Article 9.13 (Subcommittee on Investment), Article 9.14 (Focal Points or
Ombudspersons) and Article 9.15 (Dispute Prevention and Mediation) apply also to measures

affecting commercial presence within the territory of a State Party of juridical persons or

For greater certainty, this Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons
seeking access to the employment market of a State Party, nor shall it apply to measures
regarding citizenship, residence or employment on a permanent basis. This Chapter
shall not prevent a State Party from applying measures to regulate the entry of natural
persons into, or their temporary stay in, its territory.

For greater certainty, maintenance includes management, conduct and operation.

It is understood that services excluded from the scope of Chapter 10 (Trade in Services)
under paragraph 3 of Article 10.1 (Scope and Coverage) of Chapter 10 (Trade in
Services) shall not fall within the scope of this Chapter.

natural persons of another State Party in services sectors under the scope of Chapter 10

(Trade in Services).

3. Nothing in any other international agreements relating to investment to which
Singapore and one or more Signatory MERCOSUR States are parties shall be interpreted or
applied so as to invalidate, extend or otherwise affect the rights and obligations of the State

Parties arising out of this Chapter.

4. This Chapter shall not apply to:

(a) government procurement, which shall be subject to Chapter 13 (Government

Procurement);

(b) any taxation measure; and

(c) subsidies or grants provided by a State Party, including government-supported loans,
guarantees, and insurance. For greater certainty, the State Parties understand that this
includes conditions attached to the receipt or continued receipt of such subsidies or
grants, whether or not such subsidies or grants are offered exclusively to its own

juridical persons or natural persons and to the commercial presence of such persons.

5. For greater certainty, this Chapter does not impose any obligation on a State Party in
relation to any act or fact that took place or any situation that ceased to exist before the date

of entry into force of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 9.3
National Treatment
1. Where a State Party schedules commitments in accordance with Article 9.8 (Schedules

of Specific Commitments) in the sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments

in Annex I (Schedules of Specific Commitments for Investment), and subject to any

conditions and qualifications set out therein, it shall accord to the juridical persons or natural
persons of another State Party, and to the commercial presence of such persons, treatment no
less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own juridical persons or
natural persons, and to the commercial presence of such persons, with respect to the

constitution, acquisition, maintenance® and expansion of a commercial presence.

2. Fora State Party making commitments in accordance with Article 9.9 (Schedules of
Non-Conforming Measures), it shall accord to the juridical persons or natural persons of
another State Party, and to the commercial presence of such persons treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own juridical persons or natural
persons, and to the commercial presence of such persons, with respect to the constitution,

acquisition, maintenance’ and expansion of a commercial presence.

3. For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in "like circumstances" pursuant to
this Article depends on the totality of the circumstances, including whether the treatment
distinguishes between juridical persons, natural persons, or commercial presence on the basis

of legitimate public welfare objectives.

ARTICLE 9.4

Special Formalities and Information Requirements

1. Nothing in Article 9.3 (National Treatment) shall be construed to prevent a State Party
from adopting or maintaining any measure that prescribes special formalities in connection
with a commercial presence within its territory of a juridical person or a natural person of the
another State Party, such as a residency requirement for registration or a requirement that
such commercial presence be legally constituted under the laws or regulations of the State
Party, provided that such formalities do not materially impair the protections afforded by a
State Party to natural persons and juridical persons of the another State Party and to the

commercial presence of such persons pursuant to this Chapter.

For greater certainty, maintenance includes management, conduct and operation.
For greater certainty, maintenance includes management, conduct and operation.

2. Notwithstanding Article 9.3 (National Treatment), a State Party may require a natural
person or juridical person of another State Party or the commercial presence within its
territory of such persons to provide information concerning that commercial presence solely
for informational or statistical purposes. The State Party shall protect such information that is
confidential from any disclosure that would prejudice the competitive position of the natural
person or juridical person of another State Party or the commercial presence of such persons.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prevent a State Party from otherwise
obtaining or disclosing information in connection with the equitable and good faith

application of its laws and regulations.

ARTICLE 9.5

Access to Justice and Due Process of Law

1. A State Party shall not deny to a commercial presence within its territory of a juridical
person or a natural person of another State Party access to justice, including in criminal, civil
or administrative proceedings conducted in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
first-mentioned State Party.
2. Each State Party shall grant to a commercial presence within its territory of a juridical
person or a natural person of another State Party treatment in accordance with due process of
law, including in criminal, civil or administrative proceedings.

ARTICLE 9.6

Senior Management and Boards of Directors

l. Where a State Party schedules commitments in accordance with Article 9.8 (Schedules

of Specific Commitments), in the sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments

in Annex I (Schedules of Specific Commitments for Investment), and subject to any
conditions and qualifications set out therein, it shall not require that a commercial presence
within its territory of a juridical person or a natural person of another State Party appoint to

senior management positions natural persons of any particular nationality.

2. Fora State Party making commitments in accordance with Article 9.9 (Schedules of
Non-Conforming Measures), it shall not require that a commercial presence within its
territory of a juridical person or a natural person of another State Party appoint to senior

management positions natural persons of any particular nationality.

3. A State Party may require that a majority of the board of directors, or any committee
thereof, of a commercial presence within its territory of a juridical person or a natural person
of another State Party, be of a particular nationality, or resident in the territory of the State
Party, provided that the requirement does not materially impair the ability of the natural
person or juridical person of another State Party to exercise control over that commercial

presence.

ARTICLE 9.7

Schedules of Specific Commitments for Investment and Schedules of Reservations and Non-

Conforming Measures for Services and Investment

Schedules of Specific Commitments for Investment are annexed to this Agreement as Annex
I (Schedules of Specific Commitments for Investment), in the case of Argentina, Paraguay
and Uruguay (Positive Listing Approach). Schedules of Reservations and Non-Conforming
Measures for Services and Investment are annexed to this Agreement as Annex III
(Schedules of Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures for Services and Investment), in

the case of Brazil and Singapore (Negative Listing Approach).

ARTICLE 9.8

Schedules of Specific Commitments

1. A State Party making commitments in accordance with this Article shall set out in
Annex I (Schedules of Specific Commitments for Investment) the specific commitments it
undertakes under Article 9.3 (National Treatment) and Article 9.6 (Senior Management and
Boards of Directors). With respect to sectors where such commitments are undertaken, each

list shall specify:
(a) conditions and qualifications on National Treatment; and

(b) conditions and qualifications on Senior Management and Boards of Directors.

ARTICLE 9.9
Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures

1. For a State Party making commitments in accordance with this Article, Article 9.3

(National Treatment) and Article 9.6 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors) shall not

apply to:
(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by that State Party at:

(i) the central level of government as set out by that State Party in List A of its
Schedule in Annex III (Schedules of Reservations and Non-conforming Measures
for Services and Investment);

(11) a regional level of government; or

(iii) local level of government;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in

subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) to the
extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure, as it
existed at the date of entry into force of the Agreement, with Article 9.3 (National

Treatment), or Article 9.6 (Senior Management and Boards of Directors).

2. Article 9.3 (National Treatment) and Article 9.6 (Senior Management and Boards of
Directors) shall not apply to any measure that a State Party adopts or maintains with respect
to sectors, sub-sectors or activities set out in List B of its Schedule in Annex HI (Schedules of

Reservations and Non-conforming Measures for Services and Investment).

3. Articles 9.3 (National Treatment) shall not apply to any measure that is an exception to,
or derogation from, a State Party's obligations under Chapter 15 (Intellectual Property Rights)
and the TRIPS Agreement, as specifically provided for in that Agreement.

ARTICLE 9.10

Payments and Transfers

1. | Except under the circumstances envisaged in Article 19.10 (Temporary Safeguard
Measures) of Chapter 19 (Institutional, General and Final Provisions), each State Party shall
permit all transfers relating to a commercial presence of a juridical person or natural person
of another State Party within its territory, to be made freely and without undue delay into and

out of its territory. Such transfers include:
(a) contributions to capital, including the initial contribution;
(b) profits, dividends, capital gains, and proceeds from the sale of all or any part of the

commercial presence or from the partial or complete liquidation of the commercial

presence;

(c) interest, royalty payments, management fees, and technical assistance and other fees;

and

(d) payments made under a contract, including a loan agreement.

2. Each State Party shall permit such transfers to be made in a freely usable currency at

the market rate of exchange prevailing at the time of transfer.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs | and 2, a State Party may delay or prevent a transfer
through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith application of its laws and
regulations relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency, or the protection of the rights of creditors;

(b) issuing, trading, or dealing in securities, futures, options, or derivatives;

(c) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law

enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;

(d) criminal or penal offences;

(e) ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or administrative proceedings;

or

(f) social security, public retirement or compulsory savings schemes.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the State Parties under
the Articles of Agreement of the IMF, including the use of exchange actions, which are in
conformity with the Articles of Agreement of the IMF, provided that a State Party shall not
impose restrictions on capital transactions inconsistent with its commitments under this

Chapter regarding such transactions, except under Article 19.10 (Temporary Safeguard

Measures) of Chapter 19 (Institutional, General and Final Provisions Chapter) or on request

of the IMF.

ARTICLE 9.11
Right to Regulate

1. | The State Parties reaffirm their inherent right to regulate within their territories to
achieve legitimate public welfare objectives, such as the protection of public health, safety,
the environment or public morals, social or consumer protection, the conservation of living or
non-living exhaustible natural resources, or the promotion and protection of cultural

diversity.

2. The State Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage the constitution,
acquisition or maintenance® of a commercial presence in its territory by relaxing or reducing

the protections set out in paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 9.12
Responsible Business Conduct
1. | Each State Party shall encourage juridical and natural persons of another State Party
and their commercial presence within its territory to voluntarily incorporate into their
business practices and internal policies internationally recognised principles, standards and
guidelines of responsible business conduct that have been endorsed or are supported by that

State Party.

2. In accordance with its laws and regulations, each State Party should encourage juridical

and natural persons of another State Party and their commercial presence within its territory

8 For greater certainty, maintenance includes management, conduct and operation.

10

to undertake and maintain meaningful engagement and dialogue, in accordance with
international Responsible Business Conduct principles, standards and guidelines that have
been endorsed or are supported by that State Party, with Indigenous peoples, traditional

communities and local communities.

3. Each State Party recognises the importance of juridical and natural persons of another
State Party and their commercial presence within its territory implementing due diligence in
order to identify and address adverse impacts, such as on the environment and labour

conditions, in their operations, their supply chains and other business relationships.

4. Within the framework of the Subcommittee on Investment, the State Parties shall
exchange information and best practices on issues covered by paragraphs 1 and 2, including
on possible ways to facilitate the uptake of Responsible Business Conduct practices by
juridical and natural persons of another State Party and their commercial presence within its

territory.
ARTICLE 9.13

Subcommittee on Investment
1. | This Chapter shall be administered by the Subcommittee on Investment, under the Joint
Committee established on Article 19.1 of the Chapter 19 (Institutional, General and Final
Provisions Chapter).
2. The Subcommittee shall meet within | (one) year of the date of entry into force of this
Agreement. Thereafter, it shall meet whenever necessary but at least every 2 (two) years. Its
meetings shall be chaired jointly by Singapore and one of the Signatory MERCOSUR States,

and occur in such places and through such means as agreed by the State Parties.

3. The Subcommittee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

11

(a) oversee the implementation and operation of this Chapter and, if necessary, recommend

amendments to this Chapter;

(b) discuss relevant subjects for commercial presence covered by this Chapter and share
opportunities for the expansion of commercial presence, in consultations with private
sector and civil society when appropriate;

(c) identify opportunities for cooperation and further investment facilitation, with a view to
developing and coordinating, as appropriate, the implementation of cooperation and
facilitation programmes which have been mutually agreed by the interested State

Parties;

(d) endeavour to resolve and prevent disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation or

application of this Chapter; and

(e) to the extent possible provide information on measures to promote and facilitate

investments.
4. |The Subcommittee shall establish its rules of procedure.
ARTICLE 9.14
Focal Points or Ombudspersons
1. Subject to its laws and regulations, the State Parties shall establish, designate, or
maintain focal points or Ombudspersons in order to facilitate communication, information
flow and respond to inquiries from another State Party regarding measures affecting matters
covered by this Chapter.

2. The focal points or Ombudspersons shall:

(a) interact and cooperate with the focal points or Ombudspersons of other State Parties;

12

(b) interact with natural persons or juridical persons of another State Party, including in the
event of inquiries brought by such persons or facilitate their interaction, when deemed

appropriate, with its own competent governmental authorities or agencies; and

(c) facilitate access for another State Party to the information referred to in Article 17.3

(Notification and provision of information) of Chapter 17 (Transparency).
3. The focal points or Ombudspersons referred to in paragraph | are set out in Annex 9-B
(Focal Points or Ombudspersons).
ARTICLE 9.15
Dispute Prevention and Mediation
1. Without prejudice to a State Party's rights and obligations under Chapter 18 (Dispute
Settlement), the State Parties shall endeavour to settle any differences arising out of this
Chapter in an amicable manner and on the basis of mutually satisfactory solutions in
particular through the Subcommittee on Investment.
2. A State Party and the natural persons or juridical persons of another State Party may
agree at any time to resolve differences arising out of this Chapter through the use of

voluntary procedures, such as mediation, which shall be without prejudice to their legal

position or rights under this Agreement.

ARTICLE 9.16

Annexes

The following Annexes form an integral part of this Chapter:

13

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

1.

Annex 9-A (Additional Investment Provisions for Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay and

Singapore);

Annex 9-B (Focal Points or Ombudspersons);

Annex I (Schedules of Specific Commitments for Investment); and
Annex III (Schedules of Reservations and Non-conforming Measures for Services and

Investment).

ARTICLE 9.17

Savings Clause

For 2 (two) years from the date of termination of this Agreement, this Chapter

(including the relevant Annexes) and other provisions in the Agreement as may be necessary

for the application or interpretation of this Chapter shall continue to apply to a commercial

presence which is in existence at the date of termination.

2.

For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph | shall not apply to the constitution, acquisition

or expansion of such commercial presence after the date of termination.

14

CHAPTER 10

TRADE IN SERVICES

SECTION A

ARTICLE 10.1

Scope and coverage

1. This Chapter applies to measures by the State Parties affecting trade in services taken by
central, regional or local governments and authorities as well as by non-governmental bodies in the

exercise of powers delegated by central, regional or local governments or authorities.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose any obligation on the State Parties

regarding government procurement.

3. This Chapter applies to measures of the State Parties affecting trade in services, with the

exception of:

(a) national maritime cabotage !;

(b) air services, including domestic and international air transport services, whether scheduled or

non-scheduled, and related services in support of air services, other than:

Without prejudice to the scope of activities which may be considered as cabotage under the
relevant laws and regulations of a State Party , national maritime cabotage under this Chapter
covers transportation of passengers or goods between a port or point located in a Signatory
MERCOSUR State and another port or point located in the same Signatory MERCOSUR
State, including on its continental shelf (as provided in UNCLOS) and traffic originating and
terminating in the same port or point located in the Signatory MERCOSUR State.

1

(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during which an aircraft is withdrawn from

service;

(ii) the selling and marketing of air transport services; and

(111) computer reservation system (CRS) services;

(c) inland navigation.

4. — The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to subsidies granted or grants provided by a

State Party, including government-supported loans, guarantees, and insurance.”

5. This Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking access to the
employment market of a State Party, nor shall it apply to measures regarding nationality,
citizenship, residence or employment on a permanent basis.

6. The State Parties shall negotiate an Annex on Telecommunications Services, in a period not
exceeding 3 (three) years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or as otherwise agreed

by the State Parties.

7. This chapter shall not apply to any taxation measures.

ARTICLE 10.2

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) "trade in services" means the supply of a service:

For greater certainty, this paragraph includes any conditions attached to the receipt or
continued receipt of such subsidies or grants, whether or not such subsidies or grants are
offered exclusively to domestic services, service consumers, or service suppliers.

2

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(i) from the territory of a State Party into the territory of another State Party;

(ii) in the territory of a State Party to the service consumer of another State Party;

(111) by a service supplier of a State Party, through commercial presence in the territory of

another State Party;

(iv) by a service supplier of a State Party, through presence of natural persons of a State

Party in the territory of another State Party;

"services" means any service in any sector, except services supplied in the exercise of

governmental authority;

"a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority" means any service which is
supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or more service suppliers;

"service supplier" means any person that supplies, or seeks to supply, a service;?

"natural person of a State Party" means a person having the nationality of one of the State

Parties according to their respective laws and regulations;

"juridical person of a State Party" means a juridical person which is either:

(i) constituted or otherwise organised under the law of that State Party, and is engaged in

substantive business operations in the territory of a State Party; or

(11) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence, owned or controlled

by:

Where the service is not supplied or sought to be supplied directly by a juridical person but
through other forms of commercial presence such as a branch or a representative office, the
service supplier shall, nonetheless, through such commercial presence be accorded the
treatment provided for service suppliers under this Chapter. Such treatment shall be extended
to the commercial presence through which the service is supplied or sought to be supplied and
need not be extended to any other parts of the service supplier located outside the territory
where the service is supplied or sought to be supplied.

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(A) natural persons of that State Party; or

(B) juridical persons of that State Party identified under subparagraph (f)(1);

"measure" means a law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action or any

other form of a measure by a State Party;

"supply of a service" includes the production, distribution, marketing, sale and delivery of a

service;

"measures by a State Party affecting trade in services" include measures with respect to:

(i) the purchase, payment or use of a service;

(11) the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a service, services which are
required by that State Party to be offered to the public generally;

(111) the presence, including commercial presence, of persons of a State Party for the supply
of a service in the territory of another State Party;

“commercial presence" means any type of business or professional establishment, including

through:

(i) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a juridical person; or

(11) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office;

within the territory of a State Party for the purpose of supplying a service;

"sector" of a service means:

(i) with reference to a commitment, one or more subsectors of that service, as specified in a

State Party's Schedule in Annex II (Schedules of Specific Commitments for Services) or

(I)

(m)

(n)

(0)

(p)

(q)

Schedule in Annex III (Schedules of Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures for

Services and Investment); or

(11) | the whole of that service sector, including all of its subsectors;

"service of another State Party" means a service which is supplied,

(1) from or in the territory of that other State Party, or in the case of maritime transport, by
a vessel registered under the laws and regulations of that other State Party, or by a
person of that other State Party which supplies the service through the operation of a

vessel or its use in whole or in part; or

(ii) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence or through the

presence of natural persons, by service supplier of that other State Party;
“monopoly supplier of a service" means any person, public or private, which in the relevant
market of the territory of a State Party is authorised or established formally or in effect by that
State Party as the sole supplier of that service;
"service consumer" means any person that receives or uses a service;
"person" means either a natural person or a juridical person;
"juridical person" means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised under
applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or
governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole
proprietorship or association;

a juridical person is:

(1) "owned" by persons of a State Party if more than 50 % of the equity interest in it is

beneficially owned by persons of that State Party;

1.

(ii) "controlled" by persons of a State Party if such persons have the power to name a

majority of its directors or otherwise to legally direct its actions;

(iii) "affiliated" with another person if it controls, or is controlled by, that other person; or if

it and the other person are both controlled by the same person.

ARTICLE 10.3

Market Access

With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified in subparagraph (a) of

Article 10.2 (Definitions), a State Party making commitments in accordance with Article 10.7

(Schedules of Specific Commitments) shall accord services and service suppliers of another State

Party treatment no less favourable than that provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions

agreed and specified in its Schedule of Specific Commitments for Services.4

2.

The measures which a State Party shall not maintain or adopt either on the basis of a regional

subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory, either in sectors where market access commitments

are undertaken and in accordance with its specific commitments, as provided in Article 10.7

(Schedules of Specific Commitments), or subject to its non-conforming measures, as provided in

Article 10.8 (Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures) are defined as:

(a)

(b)

limitations on the number of service suppliers whether in the form of numerical quotas,

monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirement of an economic needs test;

limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas

or the requirement of an economic needs test;

If a State Party undertakes a market access commitment in relation to the supply of a service
through the mode of supply referred to in subparagraph (a)(i) of Article 10.2 (Definitions) and
if the cross-border movement of capital is an essential part of the service itself, that State
Party is thereby committed to allow such movement of capital. If a State Party undertakes a
market access commitment in relation to the supply of a service through the mode of supply
referred to in subparagraph (a)(1i1) of Article 10.2 (Definitions), it is thereby committed to
allow related transfers of capital into its territory.

6

(c) limitations on the total number of service operations or on the total quantity of service output
expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the requirement of

an economic needs test;>

(d) limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a particular service
sector or that a service supplier may employ and who are necessary for, and directly related
to, the supply of a specific service in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an

economic needs test;

(e) measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which

a service supplier may supply a service; and

(f) limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum percentage limit on

foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.

ARTICLE 10.4
National Treatment

1. A State Party making commitments in accordance with Article 10.7 (Schedules of Specific
Commitments) shall, in the sectors inscribed in its Schedule of Specific Commitments for Services,
and subject to any conditions and qualifications set out therein, accord to services and service
suppliers of another State Party, with respect to all measures affecting the supply of services,

treatment no less favourable than it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.®

2. A State Party making commitments in accordance with Article 10.8 (Schedules of Non-
Conforming Measures) shall accord to services and service suppliers of another State Party, in

respect of all measures affecting the supply of services, treatment no less favourable than that it

S Subparagraph(c) of paragraph 2 does not cover measures of a State Party which limit inputs
for the supply of services.

Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require any State
Party to compensate for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign
character of the relevant services or service suppliers.

7

accords to its own like services and service suppliers, subject to its non-conforming measures as

provided in Article 10.8.7

3. A State Party may meet the requirement of paragraph | or 2 by according to services and
service suppliers of another State Party, either formally identical treatment or formally different

treatment to that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.

4. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less favourable if
it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services or service suppliers of a State Party

compared to like services or service suppliers of another State Party.

ARTICLE 10.5

Formal Requirements

Article 10.4 (National Treatment) does not prevent a State Party from adopting or maintaining a
measure that prescribes formal requirements in connection with the supply of a service, provided
that such requirements are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or

unjustifiable discrimination. These measures include requirements:

(a) to obtain a licence, registration, certification, or authorisation in order to supply a service or as
a membership requirement of a particular profession, such as requiring membership in a
professional organisation or participation in collective compensation funds for members of

professional organisations;
(b) fora service supplier to have a local agent for service or maintain a local address;
(c) to speak a national language or hold a driver's licence; or

(d) that a service supplier:

(1) post a bond or other form of financial security;

Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require any State Party to compensate for any
inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of the relevant
services or service suppliers.

8

(11) establish or contribute to a trust account;
(111) maintain a particular type and amount of insurance;

(iv) provide other similar guarantees; or

(v) provide access to records.

SECTION B

ARTICLE 10.6

Scheduling of Commitments

1. Each State Party shall make commitments under Article 10.3 (Market Access) and Article
10.4 (National Treatment) in accordance with either Article 10.7 (Schedules of Specific

Commitments) or Article 10.8 (Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures).

2. A State Party making commitments in accordance with Article 10.7 (Schedules of Specific
Commitments) shall make commitments under the applicable paragraphs in Article 10.3 (Market

Access) and Article 10.4 (National Treatment).

3. A State Party making commitments in accordance with Article 10.8 (Schedules of Non-
Conforming Measures) shall make commitments under the applicable paragraphs in Article 10.3
(Market Access), Article 10.4 (National Treatment), Article 10.9 (Local Presence) and Article 10.10

(Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment).

ARTICLE 10.7

Schedules of Specific Commitments

1. A State Party making commitments in accordance with this Article shall set out in its

Schedule in Annex II (Schedules of Specific Commitments for Services), the specific commitments
9

it undertakes under Article 10.3 (Market Access) and Article 10.4 (National Treatment). With
respect to sectors where such commitments are undertaken, each Schedule in Annex II (Schedules
of Specific Commitments for Services) shall specify:
(a) terms, limitations and conditions on market access;
(b) conditions and qualifications on national treatment;
(c) undertakings relating to additional commitments; and
(d) where appropriate, the timeframe for implementation of such commitments.
2. Measures inconsistent with both Article 10.3 (Market Access) and Article 10.4 (National
Treatment) shall be inscribed in the column relating to Article 10.3 (Market Access). In this case,
the inscription will be considered to provide a condition or qualification to Article 10.4 (National
Treatment) as well.
ARTICLE 10.8

Schedules of Non-Conforming Measures

1. Fora State Party making commitments in accordance with this Article, Article 10.3 (Market

Access), Article 10.4 (National Treatment), Article 10.9 (Local Presence) and Article 10.10 (Most-

Favoured-Nation Treatment) shall not apply to:
(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by that State Party at:
(i) the central level of government as set out by that State Party in List A of its Schedule in
Annex III (Schedules of Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures for Services and

Investment);

(ii) the regional level of government; or

10

(111) the local level of government;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in

subparagraph (a); or

(c) an amendment to any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) to the extent
that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed at the date
of entry into force of this Agreement, with Article 10.3 (Market Access), Article 10.4
(National Treatment), Article 10.9 (Local Presence) or Article 10.10 (Most-Favoured-Nation

Treatment).

2. Article 10.3 (Market Access), Article 10.4 (National Treatment), Article 10.9 (Local
Presence) and Article 10.10 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) shall not apply to any measure that
a State Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, sub-sectors or activities set out in List B of
its Schedule in Annex III (Schedules of Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures for Services

and Investment).

ARTICLE 10.9

Local Presence
A State Party making commitments in accordance with Article 10.8 (Schedules of Non-Conforming
Measures) shall not require a service supplier of another State Party to establish or maintain a
representative office, a branch, or any form of juridical person, or to be resident, in its territory as a
condition for the supply of a service as described in subparagraphs (a)(1), (11), or (iv) of Article 10.2

(Definitions), subject to its non-conforming measures as provided in Article 10.8 (Schedules of

Non-Conforming Measures).

ARTICLE 10.10

11

Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment®

1. A State Party making commitments in accordance with Article 10.8 (Schedules of Non-
Conforming Measures) shall, subject to its non-conforming measures set out in its Schedule in
Annex III (Schedules of Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures for Services and Investment),
accord to services and services suppliers of another State Party making commitments in accordance
with Article 10.8 treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to services

and services suppliers of a non-State Party.

2. For greater certainty, whether treatment is accorded in "like circumstances" depends on the
totality of the circumstances, including whether the relevant treatment distinguishes between

services or services suppliers on the basis of legitimate public welfare objectives.

SECTION C
ARTICLE 10.11

Domestic Regulation’

1. Disciplines in this Article apply to measures by a State Party relating to licensing
requirements and procedures and qualification requirements and procedures affecting trade in

services.

2. For State Parties making commitments in accordance with Article 10.7 (Schedule of Specific
Commitments), disciplines in this Article shall only apply to sectors for which the State Party has

undertaken specific commitments and to the extent that these commitments apply.

8 This Article shall not apply to Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay. The treatment under this
Article shall not be accorded to services and services suppliers of Argentina, Paraguay and
Uruguay. For the purposes of this Article, "another State Party" means (a) for Singapore:
Brazil; and (b) for Brazil: Singapore.

’ For greater certainty, this Article will not apply to measures of the State Parties relating to
licensing requirements and procedures and qualification requirements and procedures that
affect trade in financial services as defined in Annex 10-B (Financial Services).

12

3. For State Parties making commitments in accordance with Article 10.8 (Schedule of Non-
Conforming Measures), disciplines in this Article do not apply to measures that a State Party adopts
or maintains with respect to sectors, sub-sectors, or activities as set out by that State Party in its
Schedule in Annex III (Schedules of Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures for Services and

Investment).

4. The State Parties recognise the right to regulate and to introduce new regulations on the

supply of services within their territories in order to meet their policy objectives.

5. In accordance with paragraphs 2 or 3, each State Party shall ensure that all measures of
general application affecting trade in services are administered in a reasonable, objective and

impartial manner.

6. | Where a State Party adopts or maintains a measure relating to licensing requirements and
procedures, or qualification requirements and procedures, relating to trade in services, the State

Party shall, with respect to that measure:

(a) ensure that requirements or procedures are based on criteria that are objective and transparent,

such as competence and ability to supply a service; and

(b) ensure that procedures are reasonable, simple, and do not in themselves unduly prevent

fulfilment of a requirement.

7. Each State Party shall ensure that licensing procedures, or qualification procedures used by
the competent authority and decisions of the competent authority in the authorisation process are
impartial with respect to all applicants. The competent authority should reach its decisions in an

independent manner and in particular, should not be accountable to any person supplying a service.

8. To the extent practicable, each State Party shall avoid requiring an applicant to approach more

than one competent authority for each application for authorisation.!°

10 For greater certainty, a State Party may require multiple applications for authorisation where a

service is within the jurisdiction of multiple competent authorities.
13

9. | Where authorisation is required for the supply of a service, the competent authorities of a

State Party shall:

(a) to the extent practicable, permit an applicant to submit an application at any time throughout
the year;!!

(b) allow a reasonable period for the submission of an application where specific time periods for
applications exist;

(c) to the extent practicable, ascertain without undue delay the completeness of an application for
processing under a State Party's laws and regulations;

(d) if they consider an application complete for processing under the State Party's laws and
regulations,” within a reasonable period of time after the submission of the application ensure
that:

(i) the processing of the application is completed; and
(ii) the applicant is informed of the decision concerning the application? to the extent
possible in writing'4;

(e) on request of an applicant, provide without undue delay, information concerning the status of
the application;

(f) taking into account their competing priorities and resource constraints, endeavour to accept

11

12

13

14

applications in electronic format; and

Competent authorities are not required to start considering applications outside of their
official working hours and working days.
Competent authorities may require that all information is submitted in a specified format to
consider it "complete for processing".
Competent authorities may meet this requirement by informing an applicant in advance in
writing, including through a published measure, that lack of response after a specified period
of time from the date of submission of an application indicates acceptance of the application
or rejection of the application.
"In writing" may include in electronic form.

14

(g) accept copies of documents, that are authenticated in accordance with the State Party's laws
and regulations, in place of original documents, unless the competent authorities require

original documents to protect the integrity of the authorisation process.

10. Each State Party shall ensure that the authorisation fees!* charged by its competent authorities
are reasonable, transparent, based on authority set out in a measure, and do not in themselves

restrict the supply of the relevant service.

11. Each State Party shall ensure that an authorisation, once granted, enters into effect without

undue delay, subject to applicable terms and conditions.'®

12. If an application is considered incomplete under a State Party's laws and regulations, the State
Party's competent authority shall, within a reasonable period of time, to the extent practicable,

inform the applicant.

13. If an application is rejected, to the extent possible under a State Party's laws and regulations,
either upon their own initiative or upon request of the applicant, the State Party's competent
authority shall inform the applicant of the reasons for rejection and, if applicable, the procedures for
resubmission of an application; an applicant should not be prevented from submitting another

application!” solely on the basis of a previously rejected application.

14. Each State Party shall maintain or institute as soon as practicable judicial, arbitral, or
administrative tribunals or procedures that provide for, on request of an affected service supplier of
a State Party, a prompt review of, and if justified, appropriate remedies for, administrative decisions
affecting trade in services. If such procedures are not independent of the agency entrusted with the
administrative decision concerned, each State Party shall ensure that the procedures are applied in a

way that provides for an objective and impartial review.

15 Authorisation fees do not include payments for auction, the use of natural resources, royalties,
tendering or other non-discriminatory means of awarding concessions, or mandated
contributions to universal service provision.
Competent authorities are not responsible for delays due to reasons outside their competence.
Competent authorities may require that the content of such an application be revised.

15

16
17

15. Nothing in paragraph 14 shall be construed to require a State Party to institute such tribunals
or procedures where this would be inconsistent with its constitutional structure or the nature of its
legal system.

16. Where a State Party requires authorisation to supply a service, the State Party shall provide
the information necessary to comply with the requirements and procedures for obtaining,
maintaining, amending and renewing such authorisation. Such information shall include, where it
exists:

(a) fees;

(b) contact information of relevant competent authorities;

(c) procedures for appeal or review of decisions concerning applications;

(d) procedures for monitoring or enforcing compliance with the terms and conditions of licenses

or qualifications;

(e) opportunities for public involvement, such as through hearings or comments;

(f) indicative timeframes for processing of an application; and

(g) the requirements and procedures.

ARTICLE 10.12
Recognition
1. For the purposes of fulfilment, in whole or in part, of its relevant standards or criteria for
authorisation, licensing or certification of service suppliers, and subject to the requirements of
paragraph 3, a State Party may recognise the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or

licences or certifications granted in a particular country, including any State Party and non-State

16

Parties. Such recognition may be based upon an agreement or arrangement with the country

concerned, or accorded autonomously.

2. | Where a State Party recognises, by agreement or arrangement, the education or experience
obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted, in a non-State Party, that State
Party shall afford another State Party adequate opportunity to negotiate its accession to such an
agreement or arrangement, whether existing or future, or to negotiate a comparable agreement or
arrangement with it. Where a State Party accords recognition autonomously, it shall afford adequate
opportunity for another State Party to demonstrate that the education or experience obtained,
requirements met, or licences or certifications granted, in the territory of that State Party should also

be recognised.

3. A State Party shall not accord recognition in a manner which would constitute a means of
discrimination between countries in the application of its standards or criteria for the authorisation,

licensing or certification of services suppliers, or a disguised restriction on trade in services.
4. For State Parties making commitments in Article 10.10 (Most Favoured-Nation Treatment),
nothing in that Article shall be construed to require any State Party to accord such recognition to the

education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted in another

State Party.

ARTICLE 10.13
Disclosure of confidential information
Nothing in this Chapter shall require any State Party to provide confidential information, the

disclosure of which would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest,

or which would prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.

17

ARTICLE 10.14

Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers

1. Each State Party shall ensure that any monopoly supplier of a service in its territory does not,
in the supply of the monopoly service in the relevant market, act in a manner inconsistent with that

State Party's commitments under this Chapter.

2. Where a State Party's monopoly supplier competes, either directly or through an affiliated
company, in the supply of a service outside the scope of its monopoly rights and which is subject to
that State Party's commitments, that State Party shall ensure that such a supplier does not abuse its

monopoly position to act in its territory in a manner inconsistent with such commitments.

3. If a State Party has a reason to believe that a monopoly supplier of a service of another State

Party is acting in a manner inconsistent with paragraph 1 or 2, it may request that other State Party

establishing, maintaining, or authorising such a supplier to provide specific information concerning

the relevant operations.

4. This Article shall also apply to cases of exclusive service suppliers, where a State Party,

formally or in effect:

(a) authorises or establishes a small number of service suppliers; and

(b) substantially prevents competition among those suppliers in its territory.

18

ARTICLE 10.15

Payments and transfers
1. | Except under the circumstances referred to in Article 19.10 (Temporary Safeguard Measures)
of Chapter 19 (Institutional, General and Final Provisions), a State Party shall not apply restrictions
on international transfers and payments for current transactions relating to its commitments.
2. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the State Parties under the
Articles of Agreement of the IMF, including the use of exchange actions, which are in conformity
with the Articles of Agreement of the IMF, provided that a State Party shall not impose restrictions
on capital transactions inconsistent with its commitments under this Chapter regarding such

transactions, except under Article 19.10 (Temporary Safeguard Measures) of Chapter 19

(Institutional, General and Final Provisions Chapter) or on request of the IMF.

ARTICLE 10.16

Denial of Benefits

A State Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to:

(a) the supply of a service, if it establishes that this service is supplied from or in the territory of a

non-State Party;

(b) a juridical person, if it establishes that it is a juridical person of a non-State Party;

(c) in the case of the supply of a maritime transport service, if it establishes that the service is

supplied:

(1) by a vessel registered under the laws and regulations of a non-State Party; and

19

(141) by a person of a non-State Party which operates or uses the vessel in whole or in part.

ARTICLE 10.17

Subcommittee on Trade in Services

1. A Subcommittee on Trade in Services is hereby established, composed of representatives of

each State Party.

2. The functions of the Subcommittee on Trade in Services shall include monitoring,
collaborating and considering any matter arising under or relating to the implementation or
operation of this Chapter and its Annexes. This includes the support of relevant bodies or authorities

in pursuing the activities listed in this Chapter and its Annexes.

3. The Subcommittee may meet as necessary, as mutually agreed by the State Parties.

ARTICLE 10.18

Annexes

The following Annexes form an integral part of this Chapter:

(a) Annex 10-A (Professional Services);

(b) Annex 10-B (Financial Services);

(c) Annex 10-C (Postal Services);

(d) Annex II (Schedules of Specific Commitments for Services);

(e) Annex III (Schedules of Reservations and Non-Conforming Measures for Services and

Investment).

20

CHAPTER 11

MOVEMENT OF NATURAL PERSONS

ARTICLE 11.1

Scope

1. | This Chapter applies to measures affecting the temporary entry and stay of natural persons of
a State Party into the territory of another State Party under any of the categories referred to in the
latter-mentioned State Party's Appendix in Annex 11-A (Schedules of Commitments on Movement

of Natural Persons).

2. This Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons of a State Party seeking
access to the employment market of another State Party, nor shall it apply to measures regarding

citizenship, nationality, permanent residence, or employment on a permanent basis.

3. The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons shall not be regarded as nullifying or

impairing the provisions of this Agreement.

4. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a State Party from applying measures
to regulate the entry of natural persons of another State Party into, or their temporary stay in its
territory, including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of its borders, and to ensure the
orderly movement of natural persons across its borders, provided that such measures are not applied
in such a manner as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to another State Party under this

Chapter.

ARTICLE 11.2

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) "natural person" means a natural person of a State Party as defined in subparagraph (e) of

Article 10.2 of Chapter 10 (Trade in Services);

(b) "temporary entry and stay" means entry and stay by a natural person of a State Party as

covered by this Chapter without the intent to establish permanent residence; and

(c) "immigration formality" means a visa, permit, pass or electronic authorisation or other

document granting temporary entry and stay.

ARTICLE 11.3

General principles

This Chapter reflects the common objective to facilitate the temporary entry and stay of natural
persons in accordance with the State Parties' commitments in their respective Appendices in Annex
11-A (Schedules of Commitments on Movement of Natural Persons), and the need to establish

transparent information on and procedures for the temporary entry and stay.

ARTICLE 11.4

Grant of temporary entry and stay

1. Each State Party shall grant temporary entry and stay to natural persons who comply with
measures applicable to temporary entry and stay and other related measures, such as those related to
public health and safety and national security, in accordance with this Chapter, to the extent
provided for in that State Party's commitments in its Appendix in Annex 11-A (Schedules of

Commitments on Movement of Natural Persons).

2. Each State Party shall set out in its Appendix in Annex 11-A (Schedules of Commitments on
Movement of Natural Persons) the commitments it makes with regard to temporary entry and stay
of natural persons which shall specify the conditions and limitations for temporary entry and stay,

including the length of stay, for each category of persons specified by that State Party.

3. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a State Party or its relevant

professional bodies from adopting or maintaining any applicable licensing or other requirements.

4. The sole fact that a State Party grants temporary entry and stay to a natural person of another
State Party pursuant to this Chapter shall not be construed to exempt that natural person from
meeting any applicable licensing or other requirements, including any mandatory codes of conduct,

to practise a profession or otherwise engage in business activities.
ARTICLE 11.5
Application procedures
1. | The competent authorities of each State Party shall, as expeditiously as possible, process
applications for an immigration formality of natural persons of another State Party, including

applications for extensions thereof.

2. | Upon request by an applicant, the competent authorities of a State Party shall provide, without

undue delay, information concerning the status of the application.
3. The competent authorities of each State Party shall notify the applicant of the outcome of the
application after a decision has been taken. The notification shall include, if applicable, the period

of stay and any other terms and conditions.

4. The State Parties shall endeavour to accept and process applications in electronic format.

ARTICLE 11.6

Provision of information

1. Recognising the importance of the transparency of information pertaining to the temporary
entry and stay of natural persons, each State Party shall make publicly available information
necessary for an effective application for the granting of temporary entry and stay in its territory.

Such information shall be kept updated.

2. The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall include, in particular, a description of:

(a) categories of immigration formalities relevant to the temporary entry and stay of natural

persons covered by this Chapter;

(b) requirements and procedures for application for, and issuance of, temporary entry and stay,

including information on documentation required, conditions to be met and method of filing;

and

(c) requirements and procedures for application for, and issuance of, renewed temporary stay.

3. Each State Party shall provide the other State Parties with details of relevant publications or

websites where information referred to in paragraph 2 is made available.

ARTICLE 11.7

Dispute Settlement

1. A State Party may not initiate proceedings under Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement) regarding a

refusal to grant temporary entry and stay of natural persons under this Chapter unless:

(a) the matter involves a pattern of practice; and

(b) the natural persons affected have exhausted all available administrative remedies regarding

the refusal of temporary entry and stay.

2. The remedies referred to in subparagraph (b) of paragraph 1 shall be deemed to be exhausted
if a final determination in the matter has not been issued by the competent authority within | (one)
year of the date of the institution of an administrative proceedings for the remedy, including any

proceedings for review or appeal, and the failure to issue such a determination is not attributable to

delays caused by the natural persons concerned.

ARTICLE 11.8

Contact points
1. Each State Party shall establish contact points to facilitate access for natural persons of
another State Party to the information referred to in Article 11.6 (Provision of information). The
contact points are:

(a) for Singapore, the Ministry of Trade and Industry;

(b) for Argentina, el Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, Comercio Internacional y Culto (the

Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship);
(c) for Brazil, o Ministério das Relacdes Exteriores (the Ministry of Foreign Affairs);
(d) for Paraguay, el Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores (the Ministry of Foreign Affairs); and
(e) for Uruguay, el Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores (the Ministry of Foreign Affairs).
2. The contact points shall meet as necessary to exchange information as described in Article
11.6 (Provision of information) and to consider matters pertaining to this Chapter, such as the
implementation and administration of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 11.9
Relation to other Chapters
1. | Nothing in this Agreement shall impose any obligation on a State Party regarding its
immigration measures, except as provided in this Chapter and Chapter | (Initial Provisions and
Definitions), Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement) and Chapter 19 (Institutional, General and Final

Provisions).

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose obligations or commitments with respect

to other Chapters of this Agreement.

CHAPTER 12

ELECTRONIC COMMERCE

ARTICLE 12.1

Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

1

"electronic authentication" means the process or act of verifying the identity of a party to an
electronic communication or transaction or! ensuring the integrity of an electronic

communication;

“personal information" means any information, including data, about an identified or identifiable natural person;

“commercial electronic message" means an electronic message which is sent for commercial purposes to an electronic address of a person2 through telecommunication services, comprising at least electronic mail and to the extent provided for under domestic laws and regulations, other types of messages; and

“unsolicited commercial electronic message" means a commercial electronic message that is

sent without the consent of the recipient or despite the explicit rejection of the recipient.

ARTICLE 12.2

Scope and general principles

It is understood that 'or' includes 'and' and thus encompasses situations where both or either
functions are performed.

For greater certainty, the "electronic address of a person" does not cover IP addresses.


1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a State Party with respect to trade

by electronic means.

2. Considering the potential that electronic commerce has as an instrument for social and

economic development, the State Parties recognise the importance of:

(a) clarity, transparency and predictability of their national policy frameworks to facilitate, to the

extent possible, the development of electronic commerce;
(b) interoperability, innovation and competition to facilitate electronic commerce; and
(c) international and national policies concerning electronic commerce taking into account the
interests of all users, including enterprises, consumers, non-governmental organisations and
relevant public institutions.
3. For greater certainty, measures adopted or maintained by a State Party with respect to trade by
electronic means are subject to the relevant provisions of other Chapters and Annexes of this
Agreement, including exceptions, reservations, specific commitments or non-conforming measures
that are applicable to those obligations.
4. This Chapter shall not apply to:

(a) government procurement;

(b) information held or processed by, or on behalf of, a State Party or measures related to that

information; or

(c) subsidies or grants provided by a State Party or a state enterprise, including government-

supported loans, guarantees, and insurance.

5. In the event of an inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter, the other Chapter

prevails to the extent of the inconsistency.

ARTICLE 12.3
Domestic electronic transactions framework
1. Each State Party shall not deny the legal validity of a transaction, including a contract, solely
on the basis that the transaction is in electronic form, except in circumstances provided for under its

laws and regulations.

2. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 does not prevent a State Party from requiring that certain

categories of contracts be concluded by non-electronic means.

3. Each State Party shall endeavour to:

(a) avoid any undue regulatory burden on electronic transactions;

(b) facilitate input by interested persons, where appropriate, in the development of its legal

framework for electronic transactions; and

(c) foster transparency regarding the legal framework for electronic transactions.

ARTICLE 12.4

Electronic authentication

1. | Except in circumstances provided for under its laws and regulations, a State Party shall not deny

the legal validity of a signature solely on the basis that the signature is in electronic form.

2. A State Party shall not adopt or maintain measures for electronic authentication that would:

(a) prohibit parties to an electronic transaction from mutually determining the appropriate

authentication methods for that transaction; or

(b) prevent parties to an electronic transaction from having the opportunity to establish before
judicial or administrative authorities that their transaction complies with any legal

requirements with respect to authentication.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a State Party may require that, for a particular category of
transactions, the method of authentication meets certain performance standards or is certified by an

authority accredited in accordance with its laws and regulations.

4. The State Parties shall encourage the use of interoperable electronic authentication and work

towards the mutual recognition of electronic authentication.

ARTICLE 12.5
Online consumer protection

1. The State Parties recognise the importance of transparent and effective measures that enhance
consumer confidence and trust in electronic commerce. Each State Party shall adopt or maintain
measures to proscribe misleading, fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities that cause harm,

or potential harm, to consumers engaged? in electronic commerce.
2. Misleading, fraudulent and deceptive commercial activities include:

(a) making material misrepresentations‘, including implied factual misrepresentations, or false
claims as to matters such as qualities, price, suitability for purpose, quantity or origin of goods

or services;

(b) advertising goods or services for supply without intention or reasonable capability to supply;

3 For the purposes of this Article, the term 'engaged' includes the pre-transaction phase of
electronic commerce.

4 For the purposes of this Article, material misrepresentations refer to misrepresentations that are
likely to affect a consumer's conduct or decision to use or purchase a good or service.
4

(c) failing to deliver goods or provide services to a consumer after the consumer is charged unless

justified on reasonable grounds; or

(d) charging a consumer for services or goods not requested.

3. To protect consumers engaged in electronic commerce, each State Party shall endeavour to

adopt or maintain measures that aim to ensure:

(a) that suppliers of goods and services deal fairly and honestly with consumers;

(b) that suppliers provide complete, accurate, and transparent information on goods and services

including any terms and conditions of purchase; and

(c) the safety of goods and, where applicable, services during normal or reasonably foreseeable

use.

4. The State Parties recognise the importance of affording to consumers who are engaged in
electronic commerce consumer protection at a level not less than that afforded to consumers who

are engaged in other forms of commerce.

5. The State Parties recognise the importance of cooperation between their respective consumer
protection agencies or other relevant bodies including the exchange of information and experience,
as well as cooperation in appropriate cases of mutual concern regarding the violation of consumer
rights in relation to electronic commerce in order to enhance online consumer protection, where

mutually agreed.

6. The State Parties shall endeavour to promote access to, and awareness of, consumer redress or

recourse mechanisms, including for consumers transacting cross-border.

ARTICLE 12.6

Unsolicited commercial electronic communication

1. State Parties recognise the importance of promoting confidence and trust in electronic
commerce, including through transparent and effective measures that limit unsolicited commercial

electronic messages.

2. Each State Party shall adopt or maintain measures that:

(a) require suppliers of commercial electronic messages to facilitate the ability of recipients to

prevent ongoing reception of those messages;

(b) require the consent, as specified in the laws or regulations of each State Party, of recipients to

receive commercial electronic messages; or

(c) otherwise provide for the minimisation of unsolicited commercial electronic messages.

3. Each State Party shall endeavour to ensure that commercial electronic messages are clearly

identifiable as such, clearly disclose on whose behalf they are sent, and contain the necessary

information to enable recipients to request cessation free of charge and at any time.

4. Each State Party shall endeavour to provide access to either redress or recourse against

suppliers of unsolicited commercial electronic messages that do not comply with the measures

adopted or maintained pursuant to paragraph 2.

5. The State Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in appropriate cases of mutual concern

regarding the regulation of unsolicited commercial electronic messages.

ARTICLE 12.7

Paperless trading

1. Each State Party shall endeavour to make any form issued or controlled by its customs

authority and other government agencies for export, import and transit available to the public in

electronic format.

2. Each State Party shall endeavour to accept any form issued or controlled by its customs
authority and other government agencies for export, import and transit submitted electronically as
the legal equivalent of the paper version of those documents.
3. A State Party shall not be required to apply paragraphs | and 2 where:
(a) there is an international legal requirement to the contrary; or
(b) doing so would reduce the effectiveness of the trade administrative process.
4. — Each State Party shall endeavour to develop data exchange systems to support the exchange
of electronic records used in commercial cross-border trading activities of enterprises within each
State Party's respective territory.

ARTICLE 12.8

Electronic invoicing

1. The State Parties recognise the importance of electronic invoicing to increase the efficiency,

accuracy and reliability of commercial transactions.

2. The State Parties also recognise the benefits of interoperable electronic invoicing systems in

the context of international trade and the importance of exchanging information on the adoption of

best practices related to interoperable systems for electronic invoicing.

ARTICLE 12.9

Cooperation

Recognising the global nature of electronic commerce, the State Parties shall endeavour to:

(a) work together to facilitate the use of electronic commerce by small and medium sized
7

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

enterprises;

share information and experiences on laws, regulations, and programs in the sphere of
electronic commerce, including those related to the protection of personal information,
consumer confidence and protection, security in electronic communication, e-government, the
recognition of electronic signatures, including digital signatures, and facilitation of

interoperable cross border electronic authentication;

work together to promote cross-border information flows to support a dynamic environment

for electronic commerce;

encourage development by the private sector of methods of self-regulation that foster
electronic commerce, including codes of conduct, model contracts, guidelines and

enforcement mechanisms;

participate actively in regional and multilateral forums to promote the development of
electronic commerce, including in relation to the development and application of international
standards for electronic commerce; and

promote information and communications technologies accessibility for people with specific
needs, including persons with disabilities, and under-represented groups, including indigenous
peoples, people living in rural and remote areas, women and girls, and youth and children.

ARTICLE 12.10

Cooperation on cybersecurity matters

The State Parties recognise the importance of:

(a)

(b)

building the capabilities of their national entities responsible for cyber security, including

computer security incident response; and

using existing collaboration mechanisms to cooperate on matters related to cyber security,
8

including to identify and mitigate malicious intrusions or dissemination of malicious code that

affect the electronic networks of the State Parties.

CHAPTER 13

GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT

ARTICLE 13.1

Introduction

This Chapter is based on Special and Differential Treatment for Signatory MERCOSUR States with
a view to enabling the opportunity for Signatory MERCOSUR States to enjoy the full benefits of
this Chapter in an effective and balanced manner. Special and Differential Treatment provisions for
Signatory MERCOSUR States —necessary to preserve and promote their economic development
through, inter alia, differentiated thresholds, the possibility to apply offsets, policies favouring
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (hereinafter referred to as "MSMEs"), or excluding specific
goods and services— shall be reflected in this Chapter, taking into consideration the different levels
of development amongst the State Parties. Paraguay's double asymmetric condition being
landlocked and of a relatively lower economic development shall be given additional considerations

than those given to other Signatory MERCOSUR States in general.

ARTICLE 13.2

Scope and coverage

1. This Chapter shall apply to any measure regarding covered procurement, whether or not it is

conducted by electronic means.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, covered procurement means procurement for governmental

purposes:

(a) of goods, services, or any combination thereof:

(i) as specified in each State Party's Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of Commitments

on Government Procurement); and

(b)

(c)

(d)

(c)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(ii) not procured with a view to commercial sale or resale, or for use in the production or

supply of goods or services for commercial sale or resale;

by any contractual means, including: purchase; lease; and rental or hire purchase, with or

without an option to buy;

for which the value, as estimated in accordance with Article 13.4 (Valuation of Contracts),
equals or exceeds the relevant threshold specified in a State Party's Appendix in Annex 13-A
(Schedule of Commitments on Government Procurement) at the time of publication of a
notice in accordance with Article 13.13 (Notices);

by a procuring entity; and

that is otherwise not excluded from coverage in paragraph 3 or in a State Party's Appendix in
Annex 13-A (Schedule of Commitments on Government Procurement).

Except where provided otherwise in a State Party's Appendix, this Chapter shall not apply to:

the acquisition or rental of land, existing buildings or other immovable property or the rights

thereon;

non-contractual agreements or any form of assistance that a State Party provides, including

cooperative agreements, grants, loans, equity infusions, guarantees and fiscal incentives;

the procurement or acquisition of fiscal agency or depository services, liquidation and
management services for regulated financial institutions or services related to the sale,
redemption and distribution of public debt, including loans and government bonds, notes and
other securities;

public employment contracts;

procurement conducted:

(f)

(g)

4.

(i) for the specific purpose of providing international assistance, including development

aid;

(11) under the particular procedure or condition of an international agreement relating to the
stationing of troops or relating to the joint implementation by the signatory countries of

a project; or

(111) under the particular procedure or condition of an international organisation, or funded
by international grants, loans or other assistance where the applicable procedure or

condition would be inconsistent with this Chapter.
public procurement undertaken among public entities, regardless of whether they are included
in Sections A, B and C of a State Party’s Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of

Commitments on Government Procurement) ; or

procurement made outside the territory of a State Party, for consumption outside the territory

of that State Party;

Each State Party shall specify the following information in its Appendix in Annex 13-A

(Schedule of Commitments on Government Procurement):

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

in Section A (Central Entities), the central government entities whose procurement is covered

by this Chapter;

in Section B (Sub-central Entities), the sub-central government entities whose procurement is

covered by this Chapter;

in Section C (Other Entities), all other entities whose procurement is covered by this Chapter;

in Section D (Goods), the goods covered by this Chapter;

in Section E (Services), the services, other than construction services, covered by this

Chapter;

in Section F (Construction Services), the construction services covered by this Chapter;

3

(g) in Section G (General Notes), any General Notes;

(h) In Section H (Means of Publication), means of publications; and

(i) In Section I (Threshold Adjustment Formula), the applicable Threshold Adjustment Formula.

ARTICLE 13.3
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) "commercial goods or services" means goods or services of a type generally sold or offered
for sale in the commercial marketplace to, and customarily purchased by, nongovernmental
buyers for nongovernmental purposes;

(b) "construction service" means a service that has as its objective the realisation by whatever
means of civil or building works, based on Division 51 of the United Nations Provisional
Central Product Classification ("CPC");

(c) "days" means calendar days;

(d) "electronic auction" means an iterative process that involves the use of electronic means for
the presentation by suppliers of either new prices, or new values for quantifiable non-price
elements of the tender related to the evaluation criteria, or both, resulting in a ranking or
re-ranking of tenders;

(e) "in writing" or "written" means any worded or numbered expression that can be read,
reproduced and later communicated. It may include electronically transmitted and stored

information;

(f) "juridical person" means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised under

applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(I)

(m)

(n)

(0)

(p)

governmentally-owned, including any branch, corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture,

sole proprietorship or association;

"limited tendering" means a procurement procedure whereby the procuring entity contacts a

supplier or suppliers of its choice;

"measure" means any law, regulation, procedure, administrative guidance or practice, or any

action of a procuring entity relating to a covered procurement;

"multi-use list" means a list of suppliers that a procuring entity has determined satisfy the
conditions for participation in that list, and that the procuring entity intends to use more than

once;

"natural person" means a national or permanent resident of a Signatory MERCOSUR State or

a national of Singapore;

"notice of intended procurement" means a notice published by a procuring entity inviting

interested suppliers to submit a request for participation, a tender, or both;
"offsets" means any condition or undertaking that encourages local development or improves
a State Party’s balance-of-payments accounts, such as the use of domestic content, the

licensing of technology, investment, counter-trade and similar action or requirement;

"open tendering" means a procurement procedure whereby all interested suppliers may submit

a tender;

"person" means a natural person or a juridical person;

"procuring entity" means an entity covered under a State Party's Sections A, B or C to this

Chapter;

"publish" means to disseminate information through paper or electronic means that is

distributed widely and is readily accessible to the general public;

(q)

(r)

(s)

(t)

(u)

(v)

l.

"qualified supplier" means a supplier that a procuring entity recognises as having satisfied the

conditions for participation;

"selective tendering" means a procurement procedure whereby only qualified suppliers are

invited by the procuring entity to submit a tender;

"services" includes construction services, unless otherwise specified;

"standard" means a document approved by a recognised body that provides for common and
repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for goods or services, or related processes and
production methods, with which compliance is not mandatory. It may also include or deal
exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labelling requirements as they

apply to a good, service, process or production method;

"supplier" means a person or group of persons that provides or could provide goods or

services to a procuring entity; and

"technical specification" means a tendering requirement that:

(1) | lays down the characteristics of goods or services to be procured, including quality,
performance, safety and dimensions, or the processes and methods for their production

or provision; or

(11) addresses terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labelling requirements, as they

apply to a good or service.

ARTICLE 13.4

Valuation of contracts

In estimating the value of a procurement for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is a

covered procurement, a procuring entity shall:

(a)

(b)

2.

neither divide a procurement into separate procurements nor select or use a particular
valuation method for estimating the value of a procurement with the intention of totally or

partially excluding it from the application of this Chapter; and

include the estimated maximum total value of the procurement over its entire duration,

whether awarded to one or more suppliers, taking into account:

(1) all forms of remuneration, including premiums, fees, commissions, interest or other

revenue stream that may be provided for under the contract; and

(11) where the procurement provides for the possibility of options, the total value of such

options.

Where an individual requirement for a procurement results in the award of more than one

contract, or in the award of contracts in separate parts ("recurring contracts"), the calculation shall

be based on the estimated maximum total value of the procurement. The estimation of the

maximum total value may be based on:

(a)

(b)

3.

the value of recurring contracts of the same type of good or service awarded during the
preceding 12 (twelve) months or the procuring entity's preceding fiscal year, adjusted, where
possible, to take into account anticipated changes in the quantity or value of the good or

service being procured over the following 12 (twelve) months; or
The estimated value of recurring contracts of the same type of good or service to be awarded
during the 12 (twelve) months following the initial contract award or the procuring entity's

fiscal year.

In the case of procurement by lease, rental or hire purchase of goods or services, or

procurement for which a total price is not specified, the basis for valuation may be:

(a)

in the case of a fixed-term contract:

(1) where the term of the contract is 12 (twelve) months or less, the total estimated

maximum value for its duration; or

(b)

(c)

1.

(ii) where the term of the contract exceeds 12 (twelve) months, the total estimated

maximum value, including any estimated residual value;

where a State Party's laws and regulations allow for contracts to be concluded for an

indefinite period and a total price is not specified, the estimated monthly instalment

multiplied by 48 (forty-eight); and

where it is not certain whether the contract is to be a fixed-term contract, valuation based on

subparagraph (b).

ARTICLE 13.5

Security and general exceptions

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent any State Party from taking any action

or not disclosing any information that it considers necessary for the protection of its essential

security interests relating to the procurement of arms, ammunition or war materials, or to

procurement indispensable for national security or for national defence purposes.

2.

Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner that would

constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between State Parties where the same

conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade, nothing in this Chapter shall be

construed to prevent any State Party from imposing or enforcing measures:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

necessary to protect public morals, order or safety;

necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

necessary to protect intellectual property; or

relating to goods or services of persons with disabilities, philanthropic institutions or prison

labour.

3.

The State Parties understand that subparagraph (b) of paragraph 2 includes environmental

measures necessary to protect human, animal, or plant life or health.

1.

(a)

(b)

2.

Article 13.6

National Treatment and non-discrimination

With respect to any measure related to covered procurement:

Singapore, including its procuring entities, shall accord immediately and unconditionally to
the goods and services of the Signatory MERCOSUR States and to the suppliers of the
Signatory MERCOSUR States offering such goods and services, treatment no less favourable

than the treatment accorded to its own goods, services and suppliers; and

each Signatory MERCOSUR State, including its procuring entities, shall accord immediately
and unconditionally to the goods and services of Singapore and to the suppliers of Singapore
offering such goods and services, treatment no less favourable than the treatment accorded to

its own goods, services and suppliers.

With respect to any measure regarding covered procurement, Singapore and each Signatory

MERCOSUR State, including their respective procuring entities, shall not:

(a)

(b)

3.

treat a locally established supplier of another State Party less favourably than another locally
established supplier on the basis of degree of foreign affiliation to, or ownership by, a person

of that other State Party; nor
discriminate against a locally established supplier on the basis that the goods or services
offered by that supplier for a particular procurement are goods or services of another State

Party.

This Article shall not apply to customs duties and charges of any kind imposed on, or in

connection with, importation, the method of levying such duties and charges, or to other import

regulations or formalities and measures affecting trade in services different from the ones which

specifically regulate covered procurement under this Chapter.

9

ARTICLE 13.7
Use of electronic means

1. The State Parties shall conduct covered procurement by electronic means to the widest extent

possible and may cooperate in developing and expanding the use of electronic means in government

procurement systems.

2. | When conducting covered procurement by electronic means, a procuring entity shall:

(a) ensure that the procurement is conducted using information technology systems and software,
including those related to authentication and encryption of information, that are generally
available and inter-operable with other generally available information technology systems
and software; and

(b) maintain mechanisms that ensure the integrity of requests for participation and tenders,
including establishment of the time of receipt and the prevention of inappropriate access.

ARTICLE 13.8

Conduct of procurement

1. A procuring entity shall conduct covered procurement in a transparent and impartial manner

that:

(a) 1s consistent with this Chapter, using procedures such as open tendering, selective tendering

and limited tendering;

(b) avoids conflicts of interest; and

(c) prevents corrupt practices.

10

2. A State Party may establish or maintain sanctions against such corrupt practices consistent

with its laws and regulations.

3. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a State Party from

developing new procurement policies, procedures or contractual means, provided that they are not

inconsistent with this Chapter.

ARTICLE 13.9

Rules of origin

For the purposes of covered procurement, a State Party shall not apply rules of origin to goods

imported from another State Party that are different from the rules of origin that the State Party applies

at the same time in the normal course of trade to imports of the same goods from the same State Party.

ARTICLE 13.10

Denial of benefits

A State Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of another State Party if

such supplier:

(a) is a juridical person of that other State Party not engaged in substantive business operation in

the territory of that other State Party; or

(b) is a person that supplies the service from the territory of a non-Party.

ARTICLE 13.11

Offsets

11

Signatory MERCOSUR States may, in the qualification and selection of suppliers, goods or

services, or in the evaluation of tenders and award of contracts, impose, seek or consider offsets.

ARTICLE 13.12

Information on the procurement system

Each State Party shall:

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

3.

promptly publish any law, regulation, judicial decision or administrative ruling of general
application, standard contract clause mandated by law or regulation and incorporated by
reference in notices or tender documentation and procedure regarding covered procurement,
and any modifications thereof, in an officially designated electronic or paper medium that is

widely disseminated and remains readily accessible to the public; and

provide an explanation thereof to another State Party, on request.

Each State Party shall list in Section H (Means of Publication) of its Appendix in Annex 13-A

(Schedule of Commitments on Government Procurement):

the electronic or paper media in which the State Party publishes the information described in

subparagraph (a) of paragraph 1; and
the electronic or paper media in which the State Party publishes the notices required by
Article 13.13 (Notices), Article 13.15(7) (Qualification of Suppliers), and Article 13.22(2)

(Transparency of Procurement Information).

Each State Party shall promptly notify the other State Parties of any modification to the State

Party's information listed in Section H (Means of Publication) of its Appendix in Annex 13-A

(Schedule of Commitments on Government Procurement).

ARTICLE 13.13
12

Notices

1. For each covered procurement, a procuring entity shall publish a notice of intended
procurement in the appropriate paper or electronic medium listed in Section H (Means of
Publication) of the State Party’s Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of Commitments on
Government Procurement), except in the circumstances described in Article 13.19 (Limited
Tendering). Such medium shall be widely disseminated and such notice shall remain readily
accessible to the public, at least until the expiration of the time period indicated in the notice.
Procuring entities are encouraged to publish their notices by electronic means free of charge

through a single point of access.

2. Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, each notice of intended procurement shall

include the following information, unless that information is provided in the tender documentation

that is made available free of charge to all interested suppliers at the same time as the notice of

intended procurement:

(a) the name and address of the procuring entity and other information necessary to contact the
procuring entity and obtain all relevant documents relating to the procurement, and their cost

and terms of payment, if any;

(b) a description of the procurement, including the nature and the quantity of the goods or

services to be procured or, where the quantity is not known, the estimated quantity;

(c) for recurring contracts, an estimate, if possible, of the timing of subsequent notices of

intended procurement;

(d) a description of options, if any;

(e) the timeframe for delivery of goods or services or the duration of the contract;

(f) the procurement procedure that will be used and whether it will involve negotiation or

electronic auction;

13

(g)

(h)

(i)

Q)

(k)

3.

where applicable, the address and any final date for the submission of requests for

participation in the procurement;

the address and the final date for the submission of tenders;

the language or languages in which tenders or requests for participation may be submitted, if
they may be submitted in a language other than an official language of the State Party of the

procuring entity;

a list and brief description of any conditions for participation of suppliers, including any
requirements for specific documents or certifications to be provided by suppliers in

connection therewith; and

where, pursuant to Article 13.15 (Qualification of Suppliers), a procuring entity intends to
select a limited number of qualified suppliers to be invited to tender, the criteria that will be
used to select them and, where applicable, any limitation on the number of suppliers that will

be permitted to tender.

For each case of intended procurement, a procuring entity shall publish a summary notice that

is readily accessible, at the same time as the publication of the notice of intended procurement in

one of the WTO official languages. The summary notice shall contain at least the following

information:

(a) the subject matter of the procurement;

(b) _ the final date for the submission of tenders or, where applicable, any final date for the
submission of requests for participation in the procurement or for inclusion on a multi-use list;
and

(c) the address from which documents relating to the procurement may be requested.

4.  Procuring entities are encouraged to publish in the appropriate paper or electronic medium

listed in Section H (Means of Publication) of the State Party’s Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule

of Commitments on Government Procurement), as early as possible in each fiscal year, a notice

14

regarding their future procurement plans ("notice of planned procurement"). The notice of planned
procurement should include the subject matter of the procurement and the planned date or indicative

period of the publication of the notice of intended procurement.

5. | A procuring entity covered under Section B (Sub-Central Entities) and Section C (Other
Entities) of a State Party’s Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of Commitments on Government
Procurement) may use a notice of planned procurement as a notice of intended procurement
provided that the notice of planned procurement includes as much of the information referred to in
paragraph 2 as is available to the procuring entity and a statement that interested suppliers should

express their interest in the procurement to the procuring entity.

ARTICLE 13.14

Conditions for participation

1. A procuring entity shall limit any conditions for participation in a procurement to those that

are essential to ensure that a supplier has the legal and financial capacities and the commercial and

technical abilities to undertake the relevant procurement.

2. In establishing the conditions for participation, a procuring entity:

(a) shall not impose the condition that, in order for a supplier to participate in a procurement, the

supplier has previously been awarded one or more contracts by a procuring entity of that State Party

or that the supplier has prior work experience in the territory of a given State Party; and

(b) may require relevant prior experience where essential to meet the requirements of the

procurement.

3. In assessing whether a supplier satisfies the conditions for participation, a procuring entity:

(a) shall evaluate the financial capacity and the commercial and technical abilities of a supplier
on the basis of that supplier's business activities both inside and outside the territory of the

State Party of the procuring entity; and

15

(b)

4.

shall base its evaluation on the conditions that the procuring entity has specified in advance in

notices or tender documentation.

Where there is supporting evidence, a State Party, including its procuring entities, may

exclude a supplier on grounds such as:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

1.

bankruptcy;

false declarations;

significant or persistent deficiencies in performance of any substantive requirement or

obligation under a prior contract or contracts;

final judgments in respect of serious crimes or other serious offences;

professional misconduct or acts or omissions that adversely reflect on the commercial

integrity of the supplier;

failure to pay taxes; or

other sanctions and grounds provided for in a State Party's laws and regulations that disqualify

the supplier to contract with entities of that State Party provided that these sanctions and

grounds are not inconsistent with the Chapter.

ARTICLE 13.15

Qualification of suppliers

A State Party may maintain a supplier registration system under which interested suppliers are

required to register and provide certain information.

2.

Each State Party shall endeavour to ensure that:

16

(a) its procuring entities make efforts to minimise differences in their qualification procedures;

and

(b) where its procuring entities maintain registration systems, the entities make efforts to

minimise differences in their registration systems.

3. A State Party that uses supplier registration systems or qualification procedures shall not
adopt or apply such systems or procedures with the purpose or the effect of creating unnecessary
obstacles to the participation of suppliers of another State Party in its procurement. A State Party
shall ensure that all requirements for inclusion in such supplier registration system or for

participation in such qualification procedure are publicly available.

4. If a State Party provides for the possibility for a procuring entity to use selective tendering,

the procuring entity shall:

(a) include in the notice of intended procurement at least the information specified in
subparagraphs (a), (b), (f), (g), Gj) and (k) of Article 13.13(2) (Notices) and invite suppliers to

submit a request for participation; and

(b) provide, by the commencement of the time period for tendering, at least the information
specified in subparagraphs (c), (d), (e), (h) and (1) of Article 13.13(2) (Notices) to the
qualified suppliers that it notifies as specified in sub-paragraph (b) of Article 13.17(3) (Time
periods).

5. A procuring entity shall allow all qualified suppliers to participate in a particular procurement,
unless the procuring entity states in the notice of intended procurement any limitation on the
number of suppliers that will be permitted to tender and the criteria for selecting the limited number

of suppliers.

6. | Where the tender documentation is not made publicly available from the date of publication
of the notice referred to in paragraph 4, a procuring entity shall ensure that those documents are
made available at the same time to all the qualified suppliers selected in accordance with

paragraph 5.

17

7. A procuring entity, where the laws and regulations of the State Party to which it belongs
permit, may maintain a multi-use list of suppliers, provided that a notice inviting interested
suppliers to apply for inclusion on the list is:

(a) published annually; and

(b) where published by electronic means, made available continuously,

in the appropriate medium listed in Section H (Means of Publication) of the State Party’s Appendix

in Annex 13-A (Schedule of Commitments on Government Procurement).

8. The notice provided for in paragraph 7 shall include:

(a) a description of the goods or services, or categories thereof, for which the list may be used;

(b) the conditions for participation to be satisfied by suppliers for inclusion on the list and the

methods that the procuring entity will use to verify that a supplier satisfies the conditions;

(c) the name and address of the procuring entity and other information necessary to contact the

procuring entity and obtain all relevant documents relating to the list;

(d) the period of validity of the list and the means for its renewal or termination, or, where the
period of validity is not provided, an indication of the method by which notice will be given

of the termination of use of the list; and
(e) an indication that the list may be used for procurement covered by this Chapter.
9. Notwithstanding paragraph 7, where a multi-use list will be valid for 3 (three) years or less, a
procuring entity may publish the notice referred to in paragraph 7 only once, at the beginning of the
period of validity of the list, provided that the notice:
(a) states the period of validity and that further notices will not be published; and
(b) is published by electronic means and is made available continuously during the period of its

validity.
18

10. A procuring entity shall allow suppliers to apply at any time for inclusion on a multi-use list

and shall include on the list all qualified suppliers within a reasonably short time.

11. Where a supplier that is not included on a multi-use list submits a request for participation in
a procurement based on a multi-use list and all required documents, within the time period provided
for in Article 13.17(2) (Time periods), a procuring entity shall examine the request. The procuring
entity shall not exclude the supplier from consideration in respect of the procurement on the
grounds that the procuring entity has insufficient time to examine the request, unless, in exceptional
cases, due to the complexity of the procurement, the procuring entity is not able to complete the

examination of the request within the time period allowed for the submission of tenders.

12. A procuring entity covered under Section B (Sub-Central Entities) and Section C (Other
Entities) of a State Party’s Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of Commitments on Government
Procurement)may use a notice inviting suppliers to apply for inclusion on a multi-use list as a notice

of intended procurement, provided that:

(a) _ the notice is published in accordance with paragraph 7 and includes the information required
under paragraph 8, as much of the information required under Article 13.13(2) (Notices) as is
available, and a statement that it constitutes a notice of intended procurement or that only the
suppliers on the multi-use list will receive further notices of procurement covered by the

multi-use list; and

(b) the procuring entity promptly provides to suppliers that have expressed to the procuring entity
an interest in a given procurement, sufficient information to permit them to assess their
interest in the procurement, including all remaining information required in Article 13.13(2)

(Notices), to the extent that such information is available.

13. A procuring entity covered under Section B (Sub-Central Entities) and Section C (Other
Entities) of a State Party’s Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of Commitments on Government
Procurement) may allow a supplier that has applied for inclusion on a multi-use list in accordance
with paragraph 10 to tender in a given procurement, where there is sufficient time for the procuring

entity to examine whether the supplier satisfies the conditions for participation.

19

14. A procuring entity shall promptly inform any supplier that submits a request for participation
in a procurement or application for inclusion on a multi-use list of the procuring entity’s decision

with respect to the request or application.

15. Where a procuring entity rejects a supplier's request for participation in a procurement or
application for inclusion on a multi-use list, ceases to recognise a supplier as qualified, or removes a
supplier from a multi-use list, the procuring entity shall promptly inform the supplier and, on
request of the supplier, promptly provide the supplier with a written explanation of the reasons for

its decision.

ARTICLE 13.16

Technical specifications and tender documentation

1. | A procuring entity shall not prepare, adopt or apply any technical specification or prescribe
any conformity assessment procedure with the purpose or the effect of precluding competition,
discriminating between suppliers, or otherwise creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the

State Parties.

2. In prescribing the technical specifications for the goods or services being procured, a

procuring entity shall, where appropriate:

(a) set out the technical specification in terms of performance and functional requirements, rather

than design or descriptive characteristics; and

(b) base the technical specification on international standards, where such exist; otherwise, on

national technical regulations, recognised national standards or building codes.

3. | Where design or descriptive characteristics are used in the technical specifications, a
procuring entity should indicate, where appropriate, that it will consider tenders of equivalent goods
or services that demonstrably fulfil the requirements of the procurement by including words such

as "or equivalent" in the tender documentation.

20

4. A procuring entity shall not prescribe technical specifications that require or refer to a
particular trademark or trade name, patent, copyright, design, type, specific origin, producer or
supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently precise or intelligible way of describing the
procurement requirements and provided that, in such cases, the procuring entity includes words

such as "or equivalent" in the tender documentation.

5. A procuring entity shall not seek or accept, in a manner that would have the effect of
precluding competition, advice that may be used in the preparation or adoption of any technical
specification for a specific procurement from a person that may have a commercial interest in the

procurement.

6. For greater certainty, a State Party, including its procuring entities, may, in accordance with
this Article, prepare, adopt or apply technical specifications to promote the conservation of natural

resources or protect the environment.

7. A procuring entity shall make available to suppliers tender documentation that includes all
information necessary to permit suppliers to prepare and submit responsive tenders. Unless already
provided in the notice of intended procurement, such documentation shall include a complete

description of:

(a) the procurement, including the nature and the quantity of the goods or services to be procured
or, where the quantity is not known, the estimated quantity and any requirements to be
fulfilled, including any technical specifications, conformity assessment certification, plans,

drawings or instructional materials;

(b) any conditions for participation of suppliers, including a list of information and documents

that suppliers are required to submit in connection with the conditions for participation;

(c) all evaluation criteria the procuring entity will apply in the awarding of the contract, and,

except where price is the sole criterion, the relative importance of such criteria;

(d) where the procuring entity will conduct the procurement by electronic means, any
authentication and encryption requirements or other requirements related to the submission of

information by electronic means;
21

(e) where the procuring entity will hold an electronic auction, the rules, including identification
of the elements of the tender related to the evaluation criteria, on which the auction will be

conducted;

(f) | where there will be a public opening of tenders, the date, time and place for the opening and,

where appropriate, the persons authorised to be present;

(g) any other terms or conditions, including terms of payment and any limitation on the means by

which tenders may be submitted, such as whether on paper or by electronic means; and

(h) any dates for the delivery of goods or the supply of services.

8. In establishing any date for the delivery of goods or the supply of services being procured, a
procuring entity shall take into account such factors as the complexity of the procurement, the
extent of subcontracting anticipated and the realistic time required for production, de-stocking and

transport of goods from the point of supply or for supply of services.

9. The evaluation criteria set out in the notice of intended procurement or tender documentation
may include, among others, price and other cost factors, quality, technical merit, environmental

characteristics and terms of delivery.

10. A procuring entity shall promptly provide, on request, the tender documentation to any
interested supplier, and reply to any reasonable request for relevant information by an interested or
participating supplier, or make the information available, provided that the information does not
give that supplier an advantage over other suppliers and that the request was presented within the

time limits set out in the notice of intended procurement or the tender documentation.

11. A procuring entity may require bidders to provide guarantees for maintaining the offer, and

the successful bidder to provide a guarantee for the execution of the contract.

12. Where, prior to the award of a contract, a procuring entity modifies the criteria or
requirements set out in the notice of intended procurement or tender documentation provided to
participating suppliers, or amends or reissues a notice or tender documentation, it shall transmit in

writing all such modifications or amended or reissued notice or tender documentation:
22

(a) to all suppliers that are participating at the time of the modification, amendment or reissuance,
where such suppliers are known to the procuring entity, and in all other cases, in the same

manner as the original information was made available; and

(b) in adequate time to allow such suppliers to modify and resubmit amended tenders, as

appropriate.
ARTICLE 13.17
Time periods
1. | A procuring entity shall, consistent with its own reasonable needs, provide sufficient time for

suppliers to prepare and submit requests for participation and responsive tenders, taking into

account such factors as:

(a) the nature and complexity of the procurement;

(b) the extent of subcontracting anticipated; and

(c) the time necessary for transmitting tenders by non-electronic means from foreign as well as

domestic points where electronic means are not used.

Such time periods, including any extension of the time periods, shall be the same for all interested

or participating suppliers.

2. A procuring entity that uses selective tendering shall establish that the final date for the
submission of requests for participation shall not, in principle, be less than 25 (twenty-five) days
from the date of publication of the notice of intended procurement. Where a state of urgency duly
substantiated by the procuring entity renders this time period impracticable, the time period may be

reduced to not less than 10 (ten) days.

3. Except as provided for in paragraphs 4, 5, 7 and 8, a procuring entity shall establish that the
23

final date for the submission of tenders shall not be less than 40 (forty) days from the date on
which:

(a) in the case of open tendering, the notice of intended procurement is published; or

(b) in the case of selective tendering, the procuring entity notifies suppliers that they will be

invited to submit tenders, whether or not it uses a multi-use list.

4. A procuring entity may reduce the time period for tendering established in accordance with

paragraph 3 to not less than 10 (ten) days where:

(a) The procuring entity has published a notice of planned procurement as described in Article
13.13(4) (Notices) at least 40 (forty) days and not more than 12 (twelve) months in advance of
the publication of the notice of intended procurement, and the notice of planned procurement
contains:

(1) a description of the procurement;
(11) the approximate final dates for the submission of tenders or requests for participation;

(111) the address from which documents relating to the procurement may be obtained; and

(iv) as much of the information that is required for the notice of intended procurement under

Article 13.13(2) (Notices), as is available;

(b) the procuring entity, for recurring contracts, indicates in an initial notice of intended
procurement that subsequent notices will provide time periods for tendering based on this

paragraph; or

(c) a state of urgency duly substantiated by the procuring entity renders the time period for

tendering established in accordance with paragraph 3 impracticable.

5. A procuring entity may reduce the time period for tendering established in accordance with

paragraph 3 by 5 (five) days for each one of the following circumstances:

24

(a) the notice of intended procurement is published by electronic means;

(b) all the tender documentation is made available by electronic means from the date of the

publication of the notice of intended procurement; or

(c) the procuring entity accepts tenders by electronic means.

6. The use of paragraph 5, in conjunction with paragraph 4, shall in no case result in the
reduction of the time period for tendering established in accordance with paragraph 3 to less than 10

(ten) days from the date on which the notice of intended procurement is published.

7. Notwithstanding any other provision in this Article, where a procuring entity purchases
commercial goods or services, or any combination thereof, it may reduce the time period for
tendering established in accordance with paragraph 3 to not less than 13 (thirteen) days, provided
that it publishes by electronic means, at the same time, both the notice of intended procurement and
the tender documentation. In addition, where the procuring entity accepts tenders for commercial
goods or services by electronic means, it may reduce the time period established in accordance with

paragraph 3 to not less than 10 (ten) days.

8. | Where a procuring entity that is covered under Section B (Sub-Central Entities) or Section C
(Other Entities) of a State Party’s Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of Commitments on
Government Procurement)has selected all or a limited number of qualified suppliers, the time

period for tendering may be fixed by mutual agreement between the procuring entity and the

selected suppliers. In the absence of agreement, the period shall not be less than 10 (ten) days.

ARTICLE 13.18

Negotiations

1. A State Party may provide for its procuring entities to conduct negotiations:

(a) where the procuring entity has indicated its intent to conduct negotiations in the notice of

intended procurement required under Article 13.13(2) (Notices); or

25

(b) where it appears from the evaluation that no tender is obviously the most advantageous in
terms of the specific evaluation criteria set out in the notice of intended procurement or tender

documentation.

2. A procuring entity shall:

(a) ensure that any elimination of suppliers participating in negotiations is carried out in
accordance with the evaluation criteria set out in the notice of intended procurement or tender

documentation; and

(b) where negotiations are concluded, provide a common deadline for the remaining participating

suppliers to submit any new or revised tenders.

ARTICLE 13.19

Limited tendering

1. — Provided that it does not use this provision for the purpose of avoiding competition among
suppliers or in a manner that discriminates against suppliers of another State Party or protects
domestic suppliers, a procuring entity may use limited tendering, and according to its laws and
regulations, may choose not to apply Article 13.13 (Notices), Article 13.14 (Conditions for
Participation), Article 13.15 (Qualification of Suppliers), Article 13.16(7) to (11) (Technical
Specifications and Tender Documentation), Article 13.17 (Time periods), Article 13.18
(Negotiations), Article 13.20 (Electronic Auctions) and Article 13.21 (Treatment of Tenders and

Awarding of Contracts) only under any of the following circumstances:

(a) where:

(i) no tenders were submitted or no suppliers requested participation;

(11) no tenders that conform to the essential requirements of the tender documentation were

submitted;

(111) no suppliers satisfied the conditions for participation; or
26

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(iv) the tenders submitted have been collusive,

provided that the requirements of the tender documentation are not substantially modified;

where the goods or services can be supplied only by a particular supplier and no reasonable

alternative or substitute goods or services exist for any of the following reasons:

(1) the requirement is for a work of art;

(11) the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive rights; or

(111) due to an absence of competition for technical reasons;

for additional deliveries by the original supplier of goods or services that were not included in

the initial procurement where a change of supplier for such additional goods or services:

(1) | cannot be made for economic or technical reasons such as requirements of inter-
changeability or inter-operability with existing equipment, software, services or

installations procured under the initial procurement; and

(11) would cause significant inconvenience or substantial duplication of costs for the

procuring entity;

insofar as is strictly necessary where, for reasons of extreme urgency brought about by events
unforeseeable by the procuring entity, the goods or services could not be obtained in time

using open tendering or selective tendering;

for goods purchased on a commodity market;

where a procuring entity procures a prototype or a first good or service that is developed at its
request in the course of, and for, a particular contract for research, experiment, study or
original development. Original development of a first good or service may include limited
production or supply in order to incorporate the results of field testing and to demonstrate that

the good or service is suitable for production or supply in quantity to acceptable quality
27

(g)

(h)

2.

standards, but does not include quantity production or supply to establish commercial
viability or to recover research and development costs. Subsequent procurements of these

developed goods or services, however, shall not be subject to this subparagraph.

for purchases made under exceptionally advantageous conditions that only arise in the very
short term in the case of unusual disposals such as those arising from liquidation, receivership

or bankruptcy, but not for routine purchases from regular suppliers;

where a contract is awarded to a winner of a design contest provided that:

(1) | the contest has been organised in a manner that is consistent with the principles of this
Chapter, in particular relating to the publication of a notice of intended procurement;

and

(ii) the participants are judged by an independent jury with a view to a design contract

being awarded to a winner; or

where additional construction services that were not included in the initial contract but that
were within the objectives of the original tender documentation have, due to unforeseeable
circumstances by the procuring entity, become necessary to complete the construction
services described therein. However, the total value of contracts awarded for additional
construction services shall not exceed the limits set forth in the laws and regulations of a State

Party, which shall in no case exceed 50 % of the value of the main contract.

A procuring entity shall maintain records or prepare a report in writing on each contract

awarded under paragraph 1. The records or the report shall include the name of the procuring entity,

the value and kind of goods or services procured and a statement indicating the circumstances and

conditions described in paragraph | that justified the use of limited tendering.

ARTICLE 13.20

Electronic auctions

28

1. | Where a procuring entity intends to conduct a covered procurement using an electronic
auction, the procuring entity shall provide each participant, before commencing the electronic

auction, with:

(a) the automatic evaluation method, including the mathematical formula, that is based on the
evaluation criteria set out in the tender documentation and that will be used in the automatic

ranking or reranking during the auction;

(b) the results of any initial evaluation of the elements of its tender where the contract is to be

awarded on the basis of the most advantageous tender; and

(c) any other relevant information relating to the conduct of the auction.

ARTICLE 13.21

Treatment of tenders and awarding of contracts

1. | A procuring entity shall receive, open and treat all tenders in accordance with procedures that
guarantee the fairness and impartiality of the procurement process, and the confidentiality of

tenders.

2. | Where a procuring entity provides a supplier with an opportunity to correct errors of form
between the opening of tenders and the awarding of the contract, the procuring entity shall provide
the same opportunity to all participating suppliers, provided that the correction of the error does not
substantially alter the submitted tender, nor affect the principles of transparency and fair

competition between suppliers.

3. To be considered for an award, a tender shall be submitted in writing and shall, at the time of
opening, comply with the essential requirements set out in the notices and tender documentation

and be from a supplier that satisfies the conditions for participation.

4. Unless a procuring entity determines that it is not in the public interest to award a contract, the

procuring entity shall award the contract to the supplier that the procuring entity has determined to
29

be capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract and that, based solely on the evaluation criteria

specified in the notices and tender documentation, has submitted:

(a) the most advantageous tender; or

(b) where price is the sole criterion, the lowest price.

5. | Where a procuring entity receives a tender with a price that is abnormally lower than the
prices in other tenders submitted or the estimated procurement value, the procuring entity may
verify with the supplier that it satisfies the conditions for participation and is capable of fulfilling

the terms of the contract.

6. A procuring entity shall not use options, cancel a procurement or modify awarded contracts in

a manner that circumvents the obligations under this Chapter.

7. A State Party may provide that if, for reasons imputable to the successful supplier, the
contract is not concluded within a reasonable time, or the successful supplier does not fulfil the
required guarantee for the execution of the contract, or does not comply with the contract terms, the

contract may be awarded to the next tenderer and so forth.

ARTICLE 13.22

Transparency of procurement information

1. | A procuring entity shall promptly inform participating suppliers of the procuring entity's
contract award decisions and, on request of a supplier, shall do so in writing. Subject to Article
13.23(2) and (3) (Disclosure of Information), a procuring entity shall, on request, provide an
unsuccessful supplier with an explanation of the reasons why the procuring entity did not select its

tender and the relative advantages of the successful supplier's tender.

2. No later than 72 (seventy-two) days after the award of each contract covered by this Chapter,

a procuring entity shall promptly publish a notice in the appropriate paper or electronic medium
30

listed in Section H (Means of Publication of the State Party’s Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule

of Commitments on Government Procurement)). Where the procuring entity publishes the notice

only in an electronic medium, the information shall remain readily accessible for a reasonable

period of time. The notice shall include at least the following information:

(a)

(b)

(d)

(e)

(f)

3.

a description of the goods or services procured;

the name and address of the procuring entity;

the name of the successful supplier;

the value of the successful tender or the highest and lowest offers taken into account in the

award of the contract;

the date of award; and

the type of procurement procedure used, and in cases where limited tendering was used in
accordance with Article 13.19 (Limited Tendering), a description of the circumstances

justifying the use of limited tendering.

Each procuring entity shall, for a period of at least 3 (three) years from the date it awards a

contract, maintain:

(a)

(b)

4.

the documentation and reports or records of tendering procedures and contract awards relating
to covered procurement, including the reports or records required under Article 13.19

(Limited Tendering); and

data that demonstrate how covered procurement by electronic means has been conducted from

the publication of the notice to the award of the contract.

Each State Party shall communicate to the other State Parties the available and comparable

statistics relevant to the procurement covered by this Chapter.

ARTICLE 13.23
31

Disclosure of information

1. On request of a State Party, another State Party shall provide promptly any information
necessary to determine whether a procurement was conducted fairly, impartially and in accordance
with this Chapter, including information on the characteristics and relative advantages of the
successful tender. In cases where release of the information would prejudice competition in future
tenders, the State Party that receives the information shall not disclose it to any supplier, except

after consulting with, and obtaining the agreement of, the State Party that provided the information.

2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a State Party, including its procuring
entities, shall not provide to any supplier information that might prejudice fair competition between

suppliers.

3. | Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a State Party, including its procuring

entities, authorities and review bodies, to disclose confidential information where disclosure:

(a) would impede law enforcement;

(b) might prejudice fair competition between suppliers;

(c) would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular persons, including the

protection of intellectual property; or

(d) would otherwise be contrary to the public interest.

ARTICLE 13.24

Domestic review procedures

1. Each State Party shall provide a timely, effective, transparent and non-discriminatory

administrative or judicial review procedure through which a supplier may challenge:
32

(a) breaches of this Chapter; or

(b) a failure to comply with a State Party's measures implementing this Chapter, where the
supplier does not have a right to challenge directly a breach of this Chapter under the laws and

regulations of a State Party

arising in the context of a covered procurement, in which the supplier has, or has had, an interest.

The procedural rules for all challenges shall be in writing and made generally available.

2. In the event of a complaint by a supplier, arising in the context of covered procurement in
which the supplier has, or has had, an interest, that there has been a breach or a failure as referred to
in paragraph 1, the State Party of the procuring entity may encourage that procuring entity and the
supplier to seek resolution of the complaint through consultations. The procuring entity shall accord
impartial and timely consideration to any such complaint in a manner that is not prejudicial to the
supplier's participation in ongoing or future procurement or its right to seek corrective measures

under the administrative or judicial review procedure.

3. Each supplier shall be allowed a sufficient period of time to prepare and submit a challenge,
which in no case shall be less than 10 (ten) days from the time when the basis of the challenge

became known or reasonably should have become known to the supplier.

4. Each State Party shall establish or designate at least one impartial administrative or judicial
authority that is independent of its procuring entities to receive and review a challenge by a supplier

arising in the context of a covered procurement.

5. | Where a body other than an authority referred to in paragraph 4 initially reviews a challenge,
the State Party shall ensure that the supplier may appeal the initial decision to an impartial
administrative or judicial authority that is independent of the procuring entity whose procurement is

the subject of the challenge.

6. Each State Party shall ensure that a review body that is not a court shall have its decision

subject to judicial review or have procedures that provide that:

33

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(a)

(b)

1.

the procuring entity shall respond in writing to the challenge and disclose all relevant

documents to the review body;

the participants to the proceedings (hereinafter referred to as "participants") shall have the

right to be heard prior to a decision of the review body being made on the challenge;

the participants shall have the right to be represented and accompanied;

the participants shall have access to all proceedings;

the participants shall have the right to request that the proceedings take place in public and

that witnesses may be presented; and

the review body shall make its decisions or recommendations in a timely fashion, in writing,

and shall include an explanation of the basis for each decision or recommendation.

Each State Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that provide for:

Rapid interim measures to preserve the supplier's opportunity to participate in the
procurement. Such interim measures may result in suspension of the procurement process.
The procedures may provide that overriding adverse consequences for the interests concerned,
including the public interest, may be taken into account when deciding whether such

measures should be applied. Just cause for not acting shall be provided in writing; and
Corrective action or compensation for the loss or damages suffered, which may be limited to
either the costs for the preparation of the tender or the costs relating to the challenge, or both,
if a review body determines that there has been a breach or a failure as referred to in
paragraph 1.

ARTICLE 13.25

Modifications and rectifications to coverage

A State Party may propose to modify or rectify its Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of

Commitments on Government Procurement).

34

2. | When a State Party intends to modify an Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of

Commitments on Government Procurement), the State Party shall:

(a) notify the other State Parties in writing; and

(b) include in the notification a proposal for appropriate compensatory adjustments to the other
State Parties to maintain a level of coverage comparable to that existing prior to the

modification.

3. | Notwithstanding subparagraph (b) of paragraph 2, a State Party does not need to provide
compensatory adjustments if the proposed modification covers a procuring entity over which the
State Party has effectively eliminated its control or influence over that procuring entity's covered

procurement.

4. If another State Party disputes that:

(a) an adjustment proposed under subparagraph (b) of paragraph 2 is adequate to maintain a

comparable level of mutually agreed coverage; or

(b) the modification covers an entity over which the State Party has effectively eliminated its

control or influence under paragraph 3,

it shall object in writing within 45 (forty-five) days of receipt of the notification referred to in sub-
paragraph (a) of paragraph 2. If no such objection is submitted within 45 (forty-five) days after

having received the notification, the proposed modification shall become effective.

5. The following changes to a State Party's Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of Commitments
on Government Procurement) shall be considered a rectification of a purely formal nature, provided

that they do not affect the mutually agreed coverage provided for in this Chapter:

(a) a change in the name of a procuring entity;

(b) a merger of 2 (two) or more procuring entities listed within its Appendix in Annex 13-A

(Schedule of Commitments on Government Procurement); and
35

(c) the separation of a procuring entity listed in its Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of
Commitments on Government Procurement) into 2 (two) or more procuring entities that are
all added to the entities listed in the same Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of

Commitments on Government Procurement).

The State Party making such rectification of a purely formal nature shall not be obliged to provide

for compensatory adjustments.

6. In the case of proposed rectifications to a State Party's Appendix in Annex 13-A (Schedule of
Commitments on Government Procurement), the State Party shall notify the other State Parties

every 2 (two) years following the entry into force of this agreement.

7. A State Party may notify the other State Parties of an objection to a proposed rectification
within 45 (forty-five) days from having received the notification. Where a State Party submits an
objection, it shall set out the reasons why it believes the proposed rectification is not a change
provided for in paragraph 5, and describe the effect of the proposed rectification on the mutually
agreed coverage provided for in the Agreement. If no such objection is submitted in writing within
45 (forty-five) days after having received the notification, the proposed rectification shall become

effective.

8.  If another State Party objects to the proposed modification or rectification, or to the proposed
compensatory adjustments, the State Parties shall seek to resolve the issue through consultations,
including any request of additional information. If no agreement is found within 60 (sixty) days
after the receipt of the objection, the State Parties may refer the matter to the dispute settlement
procedures under Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement) unless the State Parties agree to extend the
deadline. Once the State Parties agree through consultations or on the basis of a final arbitral award
of an arbitration panel under Article 18.13 (Interim Report and Final Arbitral Award) of

18 (Dispute Settlement), the Joint Committee shall modify forthwith the relevant Appendix in
Annex 13-A (Schedule of Commitments on Government Procurement) to reflect the agreed

modifications or rectifications or the agreed compensatory adjustments.

9. | The consultation procedure pursuant to paragraph 8 is without prejudice to the consultation

pursuant to Article 18.6 (Consultations) of Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement).

36

ARTICLE 13.26
Facilitation of participation of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
1. The State Parties recognise the important contribution that MSMEs can make to economic
growth and employment, and the importance of facilitating their participation in government
procurement.
2. If available, a State Party shall, upon request of another State Party, grant information
regarding its measures aimed at promoting, encouraging and facilitating the participation of

MSMEs in government procurement.

3. To facilitate participation by MSMEs in government procurement, each State Party shall, to

the extent possible and if appropriate:

(a) share information relevant to MSMEs;

(b) endeavour to make all tender documentation available free of charge; and

(c) undertake activities aimed at facilitating the participation of MSMEs in government

procurement.

ARTICLE 13.27

Government procurement subcommittee

The State Parties hereby establish a Subcommittee on Government Procurement (hereinafter

referred to as "Subcommittee"), composed of government representatives of each State Party. On

request of a State Party, the Subcommittee shall meet to address matters related to the operation of

this Chapter, such as:

(a) exchange of information on topics of mutual interest, including exchanges on procurement

statistical data;
37

(b)

(c)

(d)

1.

cooperation between the State Parties, as provided for in Article 13.28 (Cooperation in

Government Procurement);

facilitation of participation by MSMEs in covered procurement, as provided for in Article

13.26 (Facilitation of participation of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises); and

discussion of any other matters related to the operation of this Chapter.

ARTICLE 13.28

Cooperation in government procurement

The State Parties recognise the importance of cooperation with a view to achieving a better

understanding of their respective government procurement systems as well as better access to their

respective markets, in particular for MSMEs.

2. The State Parties shall endeavour to cooperate to ensure an effective implementation of this

Chapter.

3. The State Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in matters such as, inter alia:

(a) facilitating participation by suppliers in government procurement, in particular, with respect
to MSMEs;

(b) exchanging experiences and information, such as regulatory frameworks, best practices and
statistics including sustainable procurement;

(c) developing and expanding the use of electronic means in government procurement systems;

(d) providing capacity building and technical assistance to suppliers with a view to facilitate

access to the government procurement markets of each State Party; and

38

(e) institutional strengthening for the fulfilment of this Chapter including inter alia, capacity

building activities, transfer of knowledge, and training of government officials.

39

CHAPTER 14

COMPETITION POLICY

ARTICLE 14.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) "Competition Advocacy" means non-enforcement actions by the competition authorities to
promote competition; where applicable, such non-enforcement actions may be defined under

the competition laws of a State Party;

(b) "Competition Authority" means any authority responsible for the enforcement of each State

Party's respective competition laws;

(c) "Competition Laws" means laws and regulations of a State Party governing anticompetitive

business conduct;

(d) "Enforcement Proceedings" means judicial or administrative proceedings following an

investigation into an alleged violation of the Competition Laws.

ARTICLE 14.2

Objectives

1. The State Parties recognise that anticompetitive business conduct has the potential to distort
the proper functioning of markets and undermine the benefits of trade liberalisation. The State
Parties seek to take appropriate measures to proscribe such conduct, implement policies to promote
competition and cooperate on matters covered by this Chapter to help secure the benefits of this

Agreement.

2. The State Parties agree that the following anticompetitive business conduct, which is subject
to the imposition of sanctions or other penalties in accordance with their respective Competition
Laws, is incompatible with this Agreement, in so far as such conduct may affect trade between the

State Parties:

(a) agreements between enterprises, decisions by associations of enterprises and concerted
practices, which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of

competition;

(b) any abuse by one or more enterprises of a dominant position or a substantial market power;

and

(c) concentrations between enterprises, which significantly impede effective competition, as

specified in the respective Competition Laws of the State Parties.

ARTICLE 14.3

Competition Laws and Competition Authorities

1. Each State Party shall adopt or maintain Competition Laws that proscribe anticompetitive
business conduct, with the objective of encouraging competition in order to promote economic

efficiency, and shall take appropriate action with respect to such conduct.

2. Each State Party shall apply its Competition Laws to all commercial activities within its
territory. This paragraph does not prevent a State Party from applying its Competition Laws to

commercial activities outside its territory that have anticompetitive effects within its jurisdiction.

3. Each State Party may provide for certain exclusions or exemptions from the application of its
Competition Laws provided that those exclusions or exemptions are transparent, are in accordance

with its Competition Laws, and are based on public policy grounds or public interest grounds.

4. Each State Party shall maintain a Competition Authority that enforces its Competition Laws
in accordance with the objectives of this Chapter, and shall ensure that its Competition Authority

does not discriminate on the basis of nationality.

5. Each State Party shall ensure independence in decision-making by its Competition Authority

in relation to the enforcement of its Competition Laws.

ARTICLE 14.4

Due Process in Enforcement of Competition Laws

1. The State Parties recognise the importance of enforcing their respective Competition Laws in
a transparent, timely, and non-discriminatory manner, respecting the principles of procedural
fairness and rights of defence of the persons under investigation for possible violation of

Competition Laws.

2. Each State Party shall ensure that its Competition Authority affords a person under
investigation for possible violation of the Competition Laws of that State Party reasonable
opportunity to be heard by that Competition Authority with respect to significant legal, factual or

procedural issues that arise during the investigation.

3. Each State Party shall ensure that before it imposes a sanction or remedy against a person for

violating its Competition Laws, it affords that person:

(a) information about its Competition Authority's competition concerns, including the
identification of the specific Competition Laws alleged to have been violated and the

associated maximum potential penalties, if not publicly available;

(b) a reasonable opportunity to have access to information within the Competition Authority's
possession that is necessary to prepare an adequate defence to the Competition Authority's
allegations, in a manner that is consistent with each State Party's laws and regulations;

(c) a reasonable opportunity to be represented by legal counsel; and

(d) a reasonable opportunity to be heard and present evidence or testimony in that person's

defence.

4. — Each State Party shall provide a person that is subject to the imposition of a sanction or
remedy for violation of its Competition Laws with the opportunity to seek review of the sanction or
remedy, including review of alleged substantive or procedural errors, in a court or other

independent tribunal established under that State Party's laws and regulations.

5. Each State Party may authorise its Competition Authority to resolve alleged violations
voluntarily by consent of the Competition Authority and the person subject to the investigation. A
State Party may provide for this voluntary resolution to be subject to approval in accordance with

each State Party's laws and regulations.

6. Each State Party shall provide for the protection of confidential information obtained by its
Competition Authority during the investigative process. If a State Party's Competition Authority
uses or intends to use that information in an enforcement proceeding, the State Party shall, if it is
permissible under its law and as appropriate, allow the person under investigation or the person's
legal counsel timely access to information that is necessary to prepare an adequate defence to the

Competition Authority's allegations.
ARTICLE 14.5

Transparency

1. The State Parties recognise the value of making their competition enforcement policies as

transparent as possible.
2. Each State Party shall ensure that its Competition Laws are publicly available.

3. On request of another State Party, a State Party shall make available to the requesting State

Party public information concerning:

(a) its competition law enforcement policies and practices;! and

1 For greater certainty, disclosure of competition enforcement policies and practices would not
necessarily involve the provision of internal operating procedures and documents.
4

(b) exclusions or exemptions under its Competition Laws, provided that the request specifies the
particular good or service and market of concern and includes information explaining how the

exclusions or exemptions may hinder trade or investment between the State Parties.

4. Each State Party shall ensure that a final decision by its Competition Authority finding a
violation of its Competition Laws is made available in writing and sets out findings of fact and the

reasoning, including legal and, if applicable, economic analysis, on which the decision 1s based.

5. Each State Party shall further ensure that a final decision referred to in paragraph 4 and any
order implementing that decision are published, or , if publication is not practicable, are otherwise
made available to the public in a manner that enables interested persons and other Parties to become

acquainted with them.

6. Each State Party shall ensure that the version of the decision or order that is published or
otherwise made available to the public is redacted to the extent necessary to be consistent with that
State Party's laws and regulations regarding confidentiality and privilege and the need to safeguard
information on the grounds of public policy or public interest. A State Party's Competition
Authority will oppose, to the fullest extent possible, the disclosure of confidential information

protected under that State Party's Competition Laws.

ARTICLE 14.6

Cooperation

1. The State Parties recognise that anticompetitive business conduct transcends national borders

and that cooperation and coordination between the State Parties to foster effective competition law

enforcement is important and in the public interest.

2. The State Parties shall cooperate pursuant to this Article in a manner compatible with their

respective laws, regulations and mutual interests, and within their reasonably available resources.

3. Each State Party shall cooperate, as appropriate:

(a) in the areas of competition policy by exchanging information on the development of those
5

(b)

(c)

4.

policies;

on issues of competition law enforcement, including through notification, exchange of non-
confidential information, investigative and enforcement assistance, and consultation and

coordination on investigations of a cross-border dimension2; and
9

in exceptional circumstances, the competition authorities may exchange confidential
information after careful examination, on a case-by-case basis, and only either under specific
written waiver from the person providing such confidential information or as authorised by

each State Party's laws and regulations.

A State Party's Competition Authority may consider entering into a cooperation arrangement

or agreement with the respective authorities of another State Party that sets out mutually agreed

terms of cooperation.

5.

Recognising that the State Parties can benefit by sharing their diverse experience in

developing, administering and enforcing their competition laws and policies, the State Parties'

Competition Authority shall consider undertaking mutually agreed technical cooperation activities

to strengthen and improve effective enforcement and advocacy of Competition Laws in their

respective jurisdictions, including:

(a)

(b)

(c)

providing advice or training on relevant issues, including through the exchange of officials;

exchanging information and experiences on Competition Advocacy, including ways to

promote a culture of competition; and

assisting a State Party as it implements a new competition law.

ARTICLE 14.7

Consultations

For greater certainty, cooperation under this Article shall not prevent the State Party's
Competition Authority from making independent decisions.
6

1. Each State Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate consultations under this Article.

2. In order to foster understanding between the State Parties, or to address specific matters that
arise under this Chapter, on request of another State Party, a State Party may enter into
consultations with the requesting State Party. In its request, the requesting State Party shall indicate,
if relevant, how the matter affects trade or investment between the State Parties. The State Party
addressed may accord full and sympathetic consideration to the concerns of the requesting State

Party.

3. To facilitate the discussion regarding the matter of consultations, each State Party shall
endeavour to provide relevant non-confidential or non-privileged information to the State Party

requesting consultations.

4. — It is recognised that entering into such consultations is without prejudice to any action under
each State Party's Competition Laws and to the full freedom of ultimate decision of the Party

concerned.

ARTICLE 14.8

Non-application of dispute settlement

The Parties shall not have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement) for

any matter arising under this Chapter.

CHAPTER 15

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

SECTION A

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 15.1
Scope

1. The State Parties recall their commitments under the international treaties dealing with
intellectual property, including the TRIPS Agreement and the Paris Convention for the
Protection of Industrial Property done in Paris on 20 March 1883, as revised at Stockholm on
14 July 1967 (hereinafter referred to as "Paris Convention"). The provisions of this Chapter
shall complement the rights and obligations of the State Parties under the TRIPS Agreement
and other international treaties in the field of intellectual property to which the State Parties
are party.
2. For the purposes of this Chapter, the term "intellectual property rights" refers to:
(a) copyright and related rights;
(b) patents;

(c) trademarks;

(d) designs;

(e) layout-designs (topographies) of integrated circuits;

(f) geographical indications; and

(g) protection of undisclosed information.

ARTICLE 15.2

Objectives

The Parties recognise that the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights
should contribute to the promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer and
dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users of technological
knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic welfare, and to a balance of

rights and obligations.

ARTICLE 15.3

Principles

A State Party may, in formulating or amending its laws and regulations, adopt measures

necessary to protect public health and nutrition, and to promote the public interest in sectors

of vital importance to their socio-economic and technological development, provided that

such measures are consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.

ARTICLE 15.4

Public health

1. The State Parties recognise the importance of the Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement
and Public Health, adopted in Doha on 14 November 2001 by the Ministerial Conference of

2

the WTO (hereinafter referred to as the "Doha Declaration"). In interpreting and
implementing the rights and obligations under this Chapter, the State Parties shall ensure
consistency with this Declaration. Accordingly, the State Parties affirm that this Chapter can
and shall be interpreted in a manner supportive of each State Party's right to protect public
health and, in particular, to promote access to medicines for all.
2. The State Parties shall respect the Decision of the WTO General Council on
Implementation of Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
Health, adopted on 30 August 2003, as well as the Decision of the WTO General Council on
Amendment of the TRIPS Agreement, adopting the Protocol Amending the TRIPS
Agreement, adopted on 6 December 2005.

ARTICLE 15.5

Exhaustion

Each State Party shall be free to establish its own regime for the exhaustion of intellectual
property rights subject to the relevant provisions of the TRIPS Agreement.

SECTION B

STANDARDS CONCERNING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

SUB-SECTION 1

COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS

ARTICLE 15. 6

Protection granted

3

1.

The State Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under the following international

agreements taking into consideration that the obligations and rights under these treaties are

not binding on those that are not parties to them:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

1.

Articles 2 through 20 of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works, done in Berne on 9 September 1886 as amended on 28 September 1979

(hereinafter referred to as "the Berne Convention");

Articles 1 through 22 of the International Convention for the Protection of Performers,
Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations, done at Rome on 18 May
1984 (hereinafter referred to as the "Rome Convention");

Articles | through 12 of the Marrakesh Treaty to facilitate access for persons who are
blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print disabled, done in Marrakesh on 27 June

2013 (hereinafter referred to as the "Marrakesh Treaty");

Article 1 through 14 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty, done in Geneva on 20 December
1996 (hereinafter referred to as the "WCT"); and

Articles 1 through 23 of the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty, done in

Geneva on 20 December 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the "WPPT").

ARTICLE 15.7

Term of protection

The rights of an author of a literary or artistic work within the meaning of Article 2 of

the Berne Convention shall run for the life of the author and not less than for 50 (fifty) years

or, where the laws and regulations of the State Party so provide, for 70 (seventy) years after

the author's death.

2. in the case of anonymous or pseudonymous works, the term of protection shall run for
not less than 50 (fifty) years or, where the laws and regulations of the State Party so provide,
for 70 (seventy) years, after the work is lawfully made available to the public. However, when
the pseudonym adopted by the author leaves no doubt about his or her identity, or if the
author discloses his or her identity during the period referred to in the first sentence, the term

of protection applicable shall be that laid down in paragraph 1.

3. The term of protection of photographic and cinematographic works shall be established

by each State Party according to its laws and regulations.

4. The rights of performers and producers of phonograms shall expire in no less than 50
(fifty) years or, where the laws and regulations of the State Party so provide, 70 (seventy)
years!. This Chapter shall not prevent each State Party from limiting the protection that it

accords to those performances that are fixed in phonograms.

5. The term of protection for broadcasts shall be no less than 20 (twenty) years from the

end of the year in which the broadcast was first made.

6. | The terms laid down in this Article shall be calculated based on the event which gives

rise to them in the manner provided by the State Parties' respective laws and regulations.

ARTICLE 15.8

Presumptions relating to copyright or related rights

In civil proceedings involving copyright or related rights, each State Party shall provide for a

presumption that, at least with respect to a literary or artistic work, performance or

Each State Party may provide that the publication or lawful communication to the
public of the fixation of the performance or of the phonogram must occur within a
defined period of respectively the date of the performance (in the case of the
performers) or the date of the fixation (in the case of producers of phonograms). Each
State Party may also provide that failing such publication of the phonogram within the
defined period, the term of protection may be calculated based on when the phonogram
was fixed.

phonogram, in the absence of proof to the contrary, the person whose name appears on such
work, performance or phonogram in the usual manner, is the right holder and is consequently

entitled to institute infringement proceedings.

SUB-SECTION 2

TRADEMARKS

ARTICLE 15.9
International agreements

The State Parties shall comply with all international agreements on trademarks which they
have ratified and shall make their best efforts to ratify or accede to the Protocol Relating to
the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks, adopted at Madrid
on June 27, 1989, as amended on October 3, 2006 and on November 12, 2007 (hereinafter
referred to as the "Madrid Protocol").

ARTICLE 15.10
Registration procedure

Each State Party shall provide for a system for the registration of trademarks in which the
relevant trademark administration shall give reasons for a refusal to register a trademark in
writing. The applicant shall have the opportunity to appeal against such refusal before a
judicial authority. Each State Party shall introduce the possibility for third parties to oppose
trademark applications. Each State Party shall provide a publicly available electronic database

of trademark applications and trademark registrations’.

2 For greater certainty, the Parties agree that for the purposes of this paragraph, the
opportunity to appeal includes the possibility of review by a judicial or quasi-judicial
authority, according to each State Party's laws and regulations.

6

ARTICLE 15.11

Well-known trademarks

The Parties shall protect well-known trademarks in accordance with the TRIPS Agreement. In
determining whether a trademark is well-known, the Parties agree to take into consideration
the Joint Recommendation Concerning Provisions on the Protection of Well-Known Marks
(adopted by the Assembly of the Paris Union for the Protection of Industrial Property and the
General Assembly of the WIPO at the Thirty-Fourth Series of Meetings of the Assemblies of
the Member States of WIPO on 20 to 29 September 1999)°.

ARTICLE 15.12

Exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark

The State Parties may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark, such
as fair use of descriptive terms, provided that such exceptions take account of the legitimate

interests of the owner of the trademark and of third parties.

SUB-SECTION 3

GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS*4

ARTICLE 15.13

For greater certainty, the Parties recognise that laws and regulations may differ amongst
the State Parties.

For the purposes of this Chapter, "geographical indications" means indications which
identify a good as originating in the territory of a State Party, or a region or locality in
that territory, where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the good is
essentially attributable to its geographical origin.

7

Protection of Geographical Indications

1. Recognising the importance of the protection of geographical indications, each State
Party shall provide a system for the protection of geographical indications in accordance with
the TRIPS Agreement and protect the geographical indications of another State Party in

accordance with its laws and regulations.

2. Each State Party agrees that the system for the registration and protection of
geographical indications in its territory for such categories of wines and spirits and
agricultural products and foodstuffs as it deems appropriate shall contain the following

elements, such as:

(a) a register for the geographical indications protected in their respective territories;

(b) an administrative process to verify that geographical indications comply with the

conditions set forth in the laws and regulations of the respective State Party; and

(c) an objection procedure that allows the legitimate interests of third parties to be taken

into account.

3. Each State Party shall, through their competent national agencies, provide for a system
that facilitates, in an expeditious manner, the registration and protection of the geographical

indications of each State Party listed in Annex 15-A1.

4. For the purposes of expediting the registration and protection of geographical

indications, each State Party shall:

(a) maintain a focal point in charge of receiving all the enquiries from applicants or
authorities of the other State Party during the procedure of registration of the

geographical indications;

(b) process all the applications for the registration and protection of a geographical indication

without the imposition of unreasonable formalities;

8

(c) provide for the appointment of an authorised representative to accomplish all the
procedures related to the registration and protection of a geographical indication on

behalf of eligible applicants in the territory of the other State Party;

(d) provide for the establishment of an electronic online system for the purposes of

handling all notifications and communications with the competent authorities; and

(e) provide for the use of digital means to accomplish all the administrative formalities for

the registration of geographical indications.

5. | Upon requirement of the Joint Committee, the State Parties shall inform the Joint
Committee of the geographical indications listed in Annex 15-A1 that have been registered.

Annex 15-A3 shall be updated accordingly by decision of the Joint Committee.

6. A State Party shall maintain a publicly accessible online enquiry channel to provide
information and respond to questions related to the registration process of the geographical

indications in each territory.

7. Annex 15-A2 sets out a representative list of geographical indications (other than listed
in Annex 15-A1) in the territory of the State Parties. Where a geographical indication of a
State Party not listed in Annex 15-A1, whether listed or not in Annex 15-A2, is registered,
upon requirement of the Joint Committee, the State Parties shall inform the Joint Committee
of this registration. Annex 15-A3 shall be updated accordingly by decision of the Joint

Committee.

8. In the case of homonymous geographical indications, protection shall be accorded to
each indication, subject to the provisions of Article 22(4) of the TRIPS Agreement. Each
State Party shall determine the practical conditions under which the homonymous indications
in question will be differentiated from each other, taking into account the need to ensure

equitable treatment of the producers concerned and that consumers are not misled.

SUB-SECTION 4

DESIGNS

Article 15.14

Requirements for protection of registered designs

1. The State Parties shall provide for the protection of independently created industrial
designs that are new or original. This protection shall be provided by registration and shall
confer exclusive rights upon their holders in accordance with the provisions of this Sub-

Section.>

2. Design protection shall not extend to designs dictated essentially by technical or

functional considerations.

3. A design right shall not subsist in a design which is contrary to public order or to

accepted principles of morality.®

ARTICLE 15.15

Rights conferred by registration

The owner of a protected design shall have the right to prevent third parties, not having the

owner's consent, from at least making, offering for sale, selling or importing articles bearing

It is understood that designs are not excluded from protection simply on the basis that
they constitute a part of an article or product, provided that they are visible, fulfil the
criteria of this paragraph, and:

(a) fulfil any other criteria for design protection; and

(b) are not otherwise excluded from design protection, under the State Parties'
respective laws and regulations.

For greater certainty, this article does not require a State Party to provide design
protection for parts of articles in isolation if not already provided for in its laws and
regulations.

Nothing in this Article precludes a State Party from providing other specified exclusions
from design protection under its laws and regulations. The State Parties understand that
such exclusions shall not be extensive.

10

or embodying a design which is a copy, or substantially a copy, of the protected design, when
such acts are undertaken for commercial purposes.

ARTICLE 15.16

Term of protection

The duration of protection available shall, including renewals, amount to at least 15 (fifteen)
years of protection.

ARTICLE 15.17

Exceptions

The State Parties may provide limited exceptions to the protection of designs, provided that
such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with the normal exploitation of protected
industrial designs and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the owner of
the protected design, taking account of the legitimate interests of third parties.

SUB-SECTION 5

PATENTS

ARTICLE 15.18

International agreements

The State Parties shall make their best efforts to ratify or accede to the Patent Cooperation
Treaty, done at Washington on 19 June 1970, amended on 28 September 1979 and modified
on 3 February 1984 (hereinafter referred to as "PCT").

11

ARTICLE 15.19

Patentable subject matter

1. Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3, patents shall be available for any
inventions, whether products or processes, in all fields of technology, provided that they are
new, involve an inventive step and are capable of industrial application’. Subject to paragraph
3, patents shall be available and patent rights enjoyable without discrimination as to the place

of invention, the field of technology and whether products are imported or locally produced.

2. The State Parties may exclude from patentability inventions, the prevention within their
territory of the commercial exploitation of which is necessary to protect public order or
morality, including to protect human, animal or plant life or health or to avoid serious
prejudice to the environment, provided that such exclusion is not made merely because the

exploitation is prohibited by their law.

3. The State Parties may also exclude from patentability:

(a) diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of humans or animals;

(b) plants and animals other than micro-organisms, and essentially biological processes for
the production of plants or animals other than non-biological and microbiological
processes. However, the State Parties shall provide for the protection of plant varieties

either by patents or by an effective sui generis system or by any combination thereof.

ARTICLE 15.20

Grace period

For the purposes of this Article, the terms "inventive step" and "capable of industrial
application" may be deemed by a State Party to be synonymous with the terms "non-
obvious" and "useful" respectively.

12

Each State Party shall disregard the information contained in public disclosures used to

determine if an invention is novel if the public disclosure:

a) | was made by the inventor or his or her successors in title or, where the laws and
regulations of the State Party so provide, by a person who obtained the information

directly or indirectly from the inventor; and

b) — occurred within 12 (twelve) months prior to the date of the filing of the patent
application or, where applicable, subject to the State Party's laws and regulations, of the

recognised priority.

ARTICLE 15.21

Genetic resources, traditional knowledge, and folklore®

1. Subject to its international obligations, each State Party may establish appropriate

measures? to protect genetic resources, traditional knowledge, and folklore.

2. | Where a State Party has disclosure requirements relating to the source or origin of
genetic resources! as part of its patent system, that State Party shall endeavour to make
available its laws and regulations with respect to such requirements, including online where
feasible, in such a manner as to enable interested persons and other State Parties to become

acquainted with them.

For greater certainty, this Article is without prejudice to the position of a State Party on
genetic resources, traditional knowledge, and folklore, including in any bilateral or
multilateral negotiations through any fora, such as the World Intellectual Property
Organization Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic
Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore.

For greater certainty, the State Parties understand that such "appropriate measures" are a
matter for each State Party to determine and may not necessarily involve its intellectual
property system.

The State Parties recognise the fact that some State Parties also require, if applicable, in
their patent systems, evidence of prior informed consent and access and benefit sharing
for genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge.

10

13

1.

Each State Party shall endeavour to pursue quality patent examination.

SECTION C

ENFORCEMENT

ARTICLE 15.22

Enforcement of intellectual property rights

The State Parties shall provide suitable and effective protection of intellectual property

rights in line with the TRIPS Agreement and other international agreements to which the State

Parties are party. The State Parties shall ensure enforcement procedures as specified in Part II

of the TRIPS Agreement so as to permit effective action against any act of infringement of

intellectual property rights.

2.

In particular, the measures, procedures and remedies referred to in paragraph 1, and

provided for by each State Party under its laws and regulations, shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

3.

take into account, as appropriate, the need for proportionality between the seriousness

of the infringement and the interests of third parties;

be fair and equitable;

not be unnecessarily complicated or costly, or entail unreasonable time limits or

unwarranted delays; and

be applied in such a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade and

to provide for safeguards against their abuse.

Nothing in this Chapter affects the capacity of a State Party to enforce its laws and

regulations in general or creates any obligation on a State Party to amend its existing laws and

14

regulations as they relate to the enforcement of intellectual property rights. Without prejudice
to the foregoing general principles, nothing in this Chapter creates any obligation on the State

Parties:

(a) to put in place a judicial system for the enforcement of intellectual property rights

distinct from that for the enforcement of law in general; or

(b) with respect to the distribution of resources as between enforcement of intellectual

property rights and the enforcement of law in general.

ARTICLE 15.23

Publication of judicial decisions

In civil judicial proceedings instituted for infringement of an intellectual property right, each
State Party shall take appropriate measures, pursuant to its laws, regulations and policies, to
publish or make available to the public information on final judicial decisions. Nothing in
this Article shall require a State Party to disclose confidential information, the disclosure of
which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or would

prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.

ARTICLE 15.24

Legal costs

Each State Party shall provide that its judicial authorities, where appropriate, have the
authority to order, at the conclusion of civil judicial proceedings concerning infringement of
intellectual property rights, that the prevailing party be awarded payment by the losing party
of court costs or fees and appropriate attorney's fees, or any other expenses as provided for

under that State Party's laws and regulations.

SECTION D

COOPERATION

ARTICLE 15.25

Cooperation

1. The Parties agree to cooperate with a view to supporting the implementation of the
commitments and obligations undertaken in this Chapter. Areas of cooperation include, but

are not limited to, the following activities:

(a) exchange of information on legal frameworks concerning intellectual property rights,
including those pertaining to the implementation of intellectual property legislation and

systems, aimed at promoting the efficient registration of intellectual property rights;

(b) exchange of information and cooperation on public outreach and appropriate initiatives

to promote awareness of the benefits of intellectual property rights and systems; and

(c) any other areas of cooperation or activities as may be discussed and agreed between the

Parties.

2. Cooperation under this Chapter shall be carried out subject to each State Party's laws,
rules, regulations, directives or policies. Cooperation shall also be on mutually agreed terms

and conditions and be subject to the availability of resources of each State Party.

CHAPTER 16

MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED ENTERPRISES

ARTICLE 16.1

General principles

1. Recognising that micro, small and medium-sized enterprises and entrepreneurs
(hereinafter referred to as "MSMEs" in this Chapter) contribute significantly to development,
economic growth, employment, and innovation, and further recognising the existing robust
dialogue amongst the Parties on ways to increase MSMEs' participation in trade and
cooperation on MSMEs, the Parties seek to continue supporting the growth and development
of MSMEs by enhancing the ability of MSMEs to participate in and benefit from the

opportunities created by this Agreement.

2. The Parties acknowledge the importance of promoting an environment that facilitates
and supports the development, growth and competitiveness of MSMEs, recognising their
participation in domestic markets as well as in international trade, and their contribution in

achieving inclusive economic growth, sustainable development and enhanced productivity.

3. Recognising the fundamental role of MSMEs in maintaining dynamism and enhancing
the competitiveness of the economies of the respective Parties, the Parties shall promote
cooperation on MSMEs with the purpose of contributing to the expansion, diversification and
deepening of economic and commercial ties between the Parties, strengthening productive

sectors, and promoting the growth of and job creation by MSMEs.

4. The Parties also acknowledge that improving MSMEs' competitiveness and
productivity may further enhance MSMEs' ability to benefit from trade and investment

opportunities that arise under this Agreement.

5. The Parties also recognise the importance of innovation for MSMEs' competitiveness

and productivity, and the importance of enhanced access to information, financing and

networking in facilitating the innovation process.

ARTICLE 16.2

Information sharing

1. Each State Party shall establish or maintain its own publicly accessible website

containing information regarding this Agreement, including:

(a) the text of this Agreement, including all Annexes and Appendices;

(b) a summary of this Agreement; and

(c) information designed for MSMEs that contains:

(1) a description of the provisions of this Agreement that the State Party considers

relevant to MSMEs; and

(11) any additional information that the State Party considers useful for MSMEs

interested in benefitting from the opportunities provided by this Agreement.
2. Each State Party shall include, in its website, links to:
(a) the equivalent websites of the other State Parties; and
(b) the websites of its government agencies and other appropriate entities that provide
information which the State Party considers useful to any person interested in trading,
investing or doing business in that State Party's territory.
3. Subject to each State Party's laws and regulations, the information described in

subparagraph (b) of paragraph 2 may include:
2

(a) customs regulations and procedures;

(b) regulations and procedures concerning intellectual property rights;

(c) technical regulations, standards, and sanitary and phytosanitary measures relating to

importation and exportation;

(d) foreign investment regulations;

(e) business registration procedures;

(f) trade promotion programmes;

(g) start-ups promotion programmes;

(h) MSMEs financing programmes, including export financing services and venture

capital;

(i) employment regulations;

(j) taxation information; and

(k) statistics of economic relevance and other macro data of interest about the MSMEs

sector.

4. Each State Party shall make its best efforts to ensure that the information mentioned in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 is progressively uploaded and made accessible within three years after
this Agreement enters into force. Each State Party shall regularly review the information and
links on the website referred to in this Article to ensure that the information and links are up-

to-date and accurate.

5. Each State Party shall ensure that the information mentioned in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 is

presented in a manner that is easily understandable and accessible for MSMEs. Where

3

possible, each State Party shall endeavour to make the information available in more than one

official language of the State Parties.

ARTICLE 16.3

Contact points on MSMEs

1. Each State Party shall designate and notify the other State Parties of its contact point on

MSMEs, to facilitate communication between the State Parties on any matter covered by this

Chapter.

2. The contact points shall:

(a) promote and coordinate the activities agreed upon in this Chapter;

(b) periodically evaluate the progress and the general functioning of the provisions of this
Chapter and make recommendations, as appropriate;

(c) exchange information to assist in monitoring the implementation of this Agreement as
it relates to MSMEs;

(d) recommend additional information that a State Party may include on its website
referred to in Article 16.2 (Information sharing);

(e) review and coordinate the contact points' work programme with those of the Joint
Committee, subcommittees, working groups and other bodies established under this
Agreement, as well as those of other relevant international bodies, in order not to
duplicate those work programmes and to identify appropriate opportunities for
cooperation to improve the ability of MSMEs to engage in trade and investment
opportunities provided by this Agreement; and

(f) consider any other matter pertaining to MSMEs as the contact points may decide,

including any issues raised by MSMEs regarding their ability to benefit from this
4

Agreement.

3. The contact points shall meet, in person or by any other technological means available,

within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter as frequently

as necessary.

4. The contact points may seek to collaborate with appropriate experts and international

donor organisations in carrying out its programmes and activities.

ARTICLE 16.4

Cooperation on MSMEs

1. The Parties recognise the importance of promoting cooperation on MSMEs activities

between the Parties to support the objectives of this Chapter.

2. The Parties also recognise the importance of involving the private sector and other

relevant agencies in the development of these activities.

3. The Parties shall endeavour to promote cooperation especially, but not only, in the

following areas of interest:

(a) policies and programmes to develop entrepreneurial capital, promote entrepreneurial

culture and foster the development of dynamic MSMEs with high-growth potential;

(b) clusters in strategic sectors to increase competitiveness and productivity of MSMEs;

(c) local, regional and global value chains to enhance productive integration in sectors of

interest;

(d) regulatory frameworks to facilitate entrepreneurship and MSMEs' development and

innovation;

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

ways:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

platforms, programmes, MSMEs websites, communication and technology (ICT)
instruments to facilitate MSMEs' access to international markets and to relevant

information;

internationalisation of MSMEs;

promotion of women's participation and entrepreneurship in MSMEs to enhance their

contribution to the economy and trade;

policies and programmes that promote the digital transformation of MSMEs, the digital

economy, and Industry 4.0; and

policies and programmes that promote access to capital, credit and reciprocal

guarantees for MSMEs.

The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate especially, but not only, in the following

facilitating the exchange of information on best public policy practices, successful
experiences, and relevant information and know-how in supporting and assisting
MSMEs, such as the development and implementation of pre-incubation, incubation,

accelerators, and MSMEs support centres.

providing technical assistance, training, capacity building activities or any other

mechanism for MSMEs to increase MSMEs' trade and investment opportunities;

participating in joint programmes and pilot actions for MSMEs;

promoting the organisation and joint execution of seminars, conferences, symposiums,
business roundtables, or any other related activity to explore business, industrial and

technical opportunities for MSMEs;

developing new strategic partnerships and contacts between economic operators, and

encouraging joint ventures and networks amongst MSMEs;

6

(f) facilitating MSMEs' access to financing mechanisms, developing innovative financing
mechanisms for MSMEs, and providing up-to-date information to MSMEs about

financing instruments available to them;

(g) supporting investment by MSMEs and transfer of know-how and technology to
MSMEs;

5. The Parties recognise that in addition to the provisions in this Article, there are other

provisions in the Agreement that seek to enhance cooperation between the Parties on issues

concerning MSMEs or issues of particular benefit to MSMEs.

ARTICLE 16.5

Consultations

The Parties shall make their best efforts to resolve any matter that may arise regarding the

interpretation and application of this Chapter through dialogue, consultations and

cooperation.

ARTICLE 16.6

Non-application of dispute settlement

The Parties shall not have recourse to dispute settlement under Chapter 18 (Dispute

Settlement) for any matter arising under this Chapter.

CHAPTER 17
TRANSPARENCY
ARTICLE 17.1
Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

"administrative ruling of general application" means an administrative ruling or interpretation that

applies to all persons and factual situations that fall generally within its ambit and that establishes a

norm of conduct, but does not include:

(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or, where available in a Party's legal
system, quasi-judicial proceeding that applies to a particular person, good, or service of
another Party in a specific case; or

(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or practice; and

"interested person" means any natural or juridical person that may be subject to any rights or

obligations under a law, regulation, procedure, or administrative ruling of general application.

ARTICLE 17.2
Publication

Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative rulings of general

application with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published, or

otherwise made available in such a manner as to enable the other Parties and interested persons to

become acquainted with them!.

The Parties understand that a Party is not required to publish every law, regulation, procedure
or administrative ruling of general application referred to in Article 17.2 (Publication), and

1

ARTICLE 17.3

Notification and provision of information

1. If a Party considers that any measure may materially affect the operation of this Agreement or
otherwise substantially affect another Party's interests under this Agreement, the Party shall, to the

maximum extent possible, promptly notify that other Party of the measure.

2. On request of any Party, the requested Party shall promptly provide information and respond
to questions pertaining to any measure, whether or not the requesting Party has been previously

notified of that measure?.

3. Any notification or information provided under this Article shall be without prejudice as to

whether the measure is consistent with this Agreement.

4. Any notification, request, or information under this Article shall be provided to the other

Parties through the relevant contact points.

5. When the information required under paragraph | has been made available by notification to
the WTO in accordance with its relevant rules and procedures or when the mentioned information
has been made available on the official, publicly accessible and fee-free websites of the Parties, the

notification required under paragraph | shall be considered to have taken place.

may instead make such information available through other means under its legal system that
would enable other Parties and interested persons to become acquainted with them.

For greater certainty, this paragraph does not preclude a Party from taking the necessary steps
under its legal system in order to provide information and respond to queries as referred to in
this paragraph.

ARTICLE 17.4
Administrative proceedings

With a view to administering in a consistent, impartial and reasonable manner all measures referred
to in Article 17.2 (Publication), each Party, in its administrative proceedings applying such

measures to particular persons, goods or services of another Party in specific cases, shall:

(a) endeavour, to the extent possible, to provide persons of another Party that are directly affected
by a proceeding with reasonable notice, in accordance with domestic procedures when a
proceeding is initiated, including a description of the nature of the proceeding, a statement of
the legal authority under which the proceeding 1s initiated, and a general description of any

issues in controversy;

(b) afford such persons a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of their
positions prior to any final administrative action, insofar as time, the nature of the proceeding,

and the public interest permit; and

(c) ensure that the procedures are in accordance with its law.

ARTICLE 17.5
Review of administrative actions

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial, administrative or, where available in a Party’s
legal system, quasi-judicial tribunals or procedures for the purposes of the prompt review and,
where warranted, correction of administrative actions? relating to matters covered by this
Agreement. Such tribunals shall be impartial and independent of the office or authority entrusted
with administrative enforcement and shall not have any substantial interest in the outcome of the

matter.

3 For greater certainty, in the case of Singapore, the review of administrative actions can take
the form of common law judicial review, and the correction of administrative actions may
include a referral back to the body that took such action for corrective action.

3

2. Each Party shall ensure that, in any such tribunals or procedures, the parties to the proceeding

are provided with the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and

(b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record or, where required by its law, the

record compiled by the administrative authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided for in its laws and

regulations, that such decision shall be implemented by the office or authority with respect to the

administrative action at issue.

ARTICLE 17.6

Specific rules

Specific rules in other Chapters of this Agreement regarding the subject matter of this Chapter shall
prevail to the extent that they differ from the provisions of this Chapter.

CHAPTER 18

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

ARTICLE 18.1
Objective

The objective of this Chapter is to avoid and settle any dispute between the Parties concerning the
interpretation or application of this Agreement, with a view to arrive at, where possible, a mutually
agreed solution.

ARTICLE 18.2

Scope

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply with respect to the
avoidance or settlement of all disputes between the Parties regarding the interpretation or
application of the provisions of this Agreement and the decisions adopted by the Joint Committee,
or wherever a Party considers that:
(a) A measure of another Party is inconsistent with the obligations under this Agreement; or
(b) Another Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under this Agreement.

ARTICLE 18.3

Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

(a) "arbitration panel" means a panel established pursuant to Article 18.9 (Composition and

establishment of a panel);

(b) "complaining party" means a Party that requests the establishment of an arbitration panel

pursuant to Article 18.8 (Initiation of arbitration procedure);
(c) "disputing party" means a complaining party or a responding party; and

(d) "responding party" means a Party that has been complained against pursuant to Article 18.8

(Initiation of arbitration procedure);
ARTICLE 18.4
Choice of forum

1. | Where a dispute regarding the same matter arises under the scope provided in Article 18.2
(Scope) and under the WTO Agreement or under any other agreement to which the disputing parties

are party, the complaining party may select the forum in which to settle the dispute’.

2. Once the complaining party has selected a particular forum for a dispute, the forum selected

shall be used to the exclusion of other possible fora for that dispute.
3. For the purposes of this Article:

(a) Dispute settlement procedures under the WTO Agreement are deemed to be selected by a
Party's request for the establishment of a panel pursuant to Article 6 (Establishment of Panels)
of the DSU;

(b) Dispute settlement procedures under any other agreement to which the disputing parties are
party are deemed to be selected by a Party's request for the establishment of a dispute

settlement panel or tribunal in accordance with the provisions of that agreement; and

1 For greater certainty, a dispute concerns the same matter where it involves the same parties to
the dispute and refers to the same measure.

(c) Dispute settlement procedures under this Chapter are deemed to be selected by a Party's
request for the establishment of an arbitration panel pursuant to Article 18.8 (Initiation of

arbitration procedure).

4. Without prejudice to paragraphs | and 2, nothing in this Agreement shall preclude a Party
from suspending obligations authorised by the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO or authorised
under the dispute settlement procedure of another international agreement to which the disputing
parties are party. The WTO Agreement or other international agreement between the Parties shall

not be invoked to preclude a Party from suspending obligations under this Chapter.

ARTICLE 18.5

Parties

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, Singapore, MERCOSUR or one or more of the Signatory
MERCOSUR States may be disputing parties.

2. Singapore may initiate a dispute settlement proceeding against one or more of the Signatory
MERCOSUR States. In case of a measure of MERCOSUR, Singapore may also initiate a dispute
settlement proceeding against MERCOSUR.

3. MERCOSUR may initiate a dispute settlement proceeding against Singapore whenever the
measure at issue is a measure of Singapore that concerns MERCOSUR as a whole or all of the

Signatory MERCOSUR States.

4. One or more Signatory MERCOSUR States may individually initiate a dispute settlement
proceeding against Singapore whenever the measure at issue is a measure of Singapore that

concerns such individual Signatory MERCOSUR State(s).

5. | When MERCOSUR has requested the establishment of a panel pursuant to Article 18.8
(Initiation of arbitration procedure), a Signatory MERCOSUR State shall not initiate another

proceeding on the same matter in any other possible fora.

ARTICLE 18.6

Consultations

1. The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation and application of the
provisions of this Agreement and to resolve any dispute thereof by entering into consultations in

good faith with the aim of reaching a mutually agreed solution.

2. _ A Party shall seek consultations, by means of a written request to another Party, and shall give
the reasons for the request, including identification of the measures at issue, the applicable
provisions of the Agreement referred to in Article 18.2 (Scope), and the reasons for the applicability

of such provisions.

3. Consultations shall be held no later than 30 (thirty) days after the date of receipt of the request
for consultations, and shall be deemed concluded 60 (sixty) days after the date of receipt of the
request, unless the consulting Parties agree otherwise. Consultations on matters of urgency,
including those regarding perishable goods, shall be held no later than 15 (fifteen) days after the
date of receipt of the request, and shall be deemed concluded 30 (thirty) days after the date of

receipt of the request, unless the consulting Parties agree otherwise.

4. — Consultations may be held in person or by any technological means available to the
consulting Parties. If consultations are held in person, they shall be held in the territory of the Party
to which the request for consultations was made, unless the consulting Parties agree otherwise.
Consultations shall be confidential, and without prejudice to the rights of the consulting Parties in

any further proceedings.

5. If the Party to which the request is made does not respond to the request for consultations

within 10 (ten) days after the date of its receipt, or if consultations are not held within the

timeframes laid down in paragraph 3, or if consultations have been concluded and no mutually
agreed solution has been reached, or if the Party to which the request was made has failed to
comply with the mutually agreed solution reached, the Party which requested consultations may
request the establishment of an arbitration panel in accordance with Article 18.8 (Initiation of

arbitration procedure).

ARTICLE 18.7

Joint Committee intervention

1. If a Party considers that another Party has taken a measure inconsistent with this Agreement,

it may request the intervention of the Joint Committee.

2. Any request to the Joint Committee shall be submitted in writing and shall give the reasons

for the request, including the identification of the measures at issue and the provisions concerned.

3. The Joint Committee shall meet within 30 (thirty) days after all the Parties have received the
request referred to in paragraph 2. After having heard the arguments of the Parties referred to in
paragraph 1, the Joint Committee may issue a recommendation to reach a mutually satisfactory

solution on the matter referred to it.

4. The Joint Committee meeting may be held in person or by any other means mutually agreed
by the Parties. In case of an in-person meeting, it shall be held in the territory of the Party that has
taken the measure referred to in paragraph 1, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

5. The Joint Committee's meeting shall be confidential.

6. This Article shall be without prejudice to the rights of a Party to initiate an arbitration

procedure.

ARTICLE 18.8

Initiation of arbitration procedure

A request for the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be made in writing to the Party

complained against. The complaining party shall identify in its request the specific measures or

other matters at issue, and a summary of the legal basis of the complaint in a manner sufficient to

present the problem clearly. The complaining party shall also indicate if consultations took place

pursuant to Article 18.6 (Consultations) and the outcome of such consultations.

1.

ARTICLE 18.9

Composition and establishment of the arbitration panel

An arbitration panel shall be composed of 3 (three) arbitrators, in accordance with the

following provisions:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Within a period of 20 (twenty) days after the date of delivery of the request for the
establishment of a panel under Article 18.8 (Initiation of arbitration procedure), the
complaining party or parties, on the one hand, and the responding party or parties, on the
other, shall each appoint an arbitrator and present a list of 4 (four) non-national individuals

who are willing to serve as the third arbitrator.

If the complaining party or parties fail to appoint an arbitrator within the period specified in

subparagraph (a), the dispute settlement proceedings shall lapse at the end of that period.

If the responding party or parties fail to appoint an arbitrator within the period specified in
subparagraph (a), the first arbitrator shall appoint the second arbitrator from the list submitted
by the complaining party or parties in subparagraph (a), within 10 (ten) days after the end of
that period specified in subparagraph (a).

For the appointment of the third arbitrator, who shall serve as chairperson:

(i) the disputing parties shall endeavour to agree on the appointment of a chairperson,

taking into account the lists presented pursuant to subparagraph (a);

(11) if the disputing parties fail to appoint a chairperson under subparagraph (d)(i) within 15
(fifteen) days after the appointment of the second arbitrator, the two appointed
arbitrators shall, within 10 (ten) days thereafter, by agreement, appoint the chairperson

taking into account the lists submitted under subparagraph (a);

(111) if the two appointed arbitrators fail to appoint the chairperson under subparagraph
(d)(11), the chairperson shall, within 10 (ten) days after the timeframes specified in
subparagraph (d)(i1), be appointed by lot in the presence of the disputing parties from
the roster established in paragraph 4.

2. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which the last of the

three arbitrators is appointed.

3. Any person appointed as arbitrator shall have expertise or experience in law, international
trade, other matters covered by this Agreement, or the resolution of disputes arising under
international trade agreements. An arbitrator shall be chosen strictly on the bases of objectivity,
reliability, sound judgment and independence, and shall conduct himself or herself on these bases
throughout the course of the arbitration proceedings and in accordance with Annex 18-B (Code of
Conduct). Additionally, the chairperson shall have expertise or experience in law and in at least one
of the matters under dispute. The chairperson shall not be a national of, have his or her usual place
of residence in the territory of, or be employed by, any State Party and any nationals of the State
Parties.

4. At the first meeting of the Joint Committee under Article 19.1 (Joint Committee), the Parties
shall establish the roster to be used for the selection of arbitrators pursuant to subparagraph (d)(iii)
of paragraph 1. The roster shall consist of at least 6 (six) and up to 12 (twelve) individuals selected
from the WTO indicative list of individuals established pursuant to Article 8 (Composition of
Panels) of the DSU, unless the Parties agree otherwise. The Parties shall appoint individuals to the
roster by consensus, with Singapore, on the one hand, and MERCOSUR and the Signatory
MERCOSUR States for which this Agreement is in force collectively, on the other hand, appointing

an equal number of individuals to the roster. Once established, the roster shall be in effect for the
Parties. The roster may be reviewed by the Joint Committee and shall be reviewed whenever this
Agreement enters into force for a Signatory MERCOSUR State. If at any time a roster member is

no longer willing or available to serve, the Parties may appoint a replacement.

5. If any arbitrator appointed pursuant to this Article resigns or becomes unable to participate in
the proceeding, or is removed, a successor shall be appointed in the same manner as prescribed for
the appointment of the original arbitrator. In such a case, the work of the arbitration panel shall be
suspended for a period beginning on the date the original arbitrator resigns, becomes unable to
participate in the proceeding, or is removed and all timeframes applicable to the arbitration panel
proceedings shall be extended by the amount of time for which the work of the arbitration panel is
suspended. The work of the arbitration panel shall resume on the date the successor is appointed.

The successor shall have all the powers and duties of the original arbitrator.

ARTICLE 18.10

Consolidation of proceedings

1. If an arbitration panel has been established pursuant to Article 18.9 (Composition and
establishment of the arbitration panel) and another request is made for the establishment of an
arbitration panel related to the same dispute, a single arbitration panel shall be established,

whenever feasible.

2. The single arbitration panel shall organise its examination and present its findings to the
disputing parties in a manner that the rights which the disputing parties would have enjoyed had

separate arbitration panels examined the complaints are in no way impaired.

3. If more than one arbitration panel is established to examine the complaints related to the same
dispute, the disputing parties shall endeavour to ensure that the same persons serve as arbitrators for

each panel.

ARTICLE 18.11

Terms of reference

Unless the disputing parties otherwise agree no later than 20 (twenty) days after the date of receipt
of the request for the establishment of the arbitration panel, the terms of reference of the arbitration

panel shall be:

"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the matter referred to
in the request for the establishment of an arbitration panel pursuant to Article 18.8 (Initiation
of arbitration procedure), and issue a written interim report and a final arbitral award, as

provided in Article 18.13 (Interim report and final arbitral award) for the resolution of the

dispute."
ARTICLE 18.12
Proceedings of the arbitration panel
1. The arbitration panel shall meet in closed session, unless the disputing parties decide
otherwise.

2. The disputing parties shall be given an equal opportunity to provide at least one written
submission and to attend any of the presentations, statements or rebuttals in the proceedings. All
written submissions or information submitted by a disputing party to the arbitration panel, including
any comments on the interim report and responses to questions put by the arbitration panel, shall be

made available to the other disputing party.

3. A disputing party asserting that a measure of the other disputing party is inconsistent with this
Agreement shall have the burden of establishing such inconsistency. A disputing party asserting that
a measure is subject to an exception under this Agreement shall have the burden of establishing that

the exception applies.

4. Without prejudice to Article 18.17 (Suspension and termination of arbitration procedure), the
arbitration panel may, if requested by a disputing party and after consulting with the other disputing

party, provide adequate opportunities for the development of a mutually agreed solution.

5. The arbitration panel shall make every effort to take any decision by consensus. Where a
decision cannot be arrived at by consensus, the matter at issue shall be decided by majority vote.
The arbitrators shall not issue dissenting or separate opinions and shall maintain confidentiality as

regards the voting.

6. At the request of a disputing party, or upon its own initiative, the arbitration panel may obtain
information from any source it deems appropriate for the arbitration panel proceedings. The
arbitration panel may also seek the opinion of experts as it deems appropriate. The arbitration panel
shall consult the disputing parties before choosing such experts. Any information obtained in this
manner shall be disclosed to the disputing parties and submitted for their comments. The opinions

of experts as well as information obtained from any relevant source shall be non-binding.

7. The deliberations of the arbitration panel and the documents submitted to it shall be kept

confidential.

8. Notwithstanding paragraph 7, a disputing party may make public statements as to its views
regarding the dispute, but shall treat as confidential any information and written submissions
submitted by the other disputing party to the arbitration panel which the other disputing party has
designated as confidential. Where a disputing party has provided information or written
submissions designated as confidential, that disputing party shall, no later than 30 (thirty) days after
a request by the other disputing party, provide a non-confidential summary of the information or

written submissions which may be disclosed publicly.

ARTICLE 18.13

Interim report and final arbitral award

1. The arbitration panel shall issue an interim report to the disputing parties setting out:

10

(a) A summary of the submissions and arguments of the disputing parties;

(b) The findings of fact;

(c) Its determination as to the interpretation or application of the provisions of this Agreement, or
whether the measure at issue is inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement, or
whether a Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations under this Agreement, or any
other determination requested in the terms of reference to the extent necessary for the

resolution of the dispute;

(d) If there is a determination of inconsistency, its recommendation that the responding party
bring the measure into conformity with the obligations under this Agreement and, if the

disputing parties agree, on the means to resolve the dispute; and

(e) The reasons for the findings and determinations,

no later than 90 (ninety) days after the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. Where it
considers that this deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the arbitration panel shall notify the
disputing parties in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the arbitration
panel plans to issue its interim report. Under no circumstances should the arbitration panel issue its

interim report later than 120 (one hundred and twenty) days after the date of its establishment.

2. Any disputing party may submit a written request for the arbitration panel to review precise
aspects of the interim report within 30 (thirty) days after its issuance. After considering any written
comments by the disputing parties on the interim report, the arbitration panel may modify its report

and make any further examination it considers appropriate.

3. The arbitration panel shall issue its final arbitral award to the disputing parties no later than
150 (one hundred and fifty) days after the date of the establishment of the arbitration panel. Where
it considers that this deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the arbitration panel shall notify the
disputing parties in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the arbitration

panel plans to issue its final arbitral award. Under no circumstances should the arbitration panel

11

issue its final arbitral award later than 180 (one hundred and eighty) days after the date of its
establishment. The final arbitral award shall set out the matters listed in paragraph 1, include a
sufficient discussion of the arguments made at the interim review stage, and address clearly the

written comments of the disputing parties.
4. _Incases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods:

(a) The arbitration panel shall make every effort to issue its interim report and final arbitral award
to the disputing parties within half of the respective time periods under paragraphs | and 3.
Under no circumstances should the arbitration panel issue its final arbitral award later than 90

(ninety) days after the date of its establishment; and

(b) A disputing party may submit a written request for the arbitration panel to review precise

aspects of the interim report within half of the time period set out in paragraph 2.

5. The final arbitral award of the arbitration panel shall be final and binding on the disputing

parties, and shall not create any rights in favour of, or impose any obligations on, any person’.

6. The disputing parties shall make the final arbitral award publicly available in its entirety,
unless the disputing parties decide, by mutual agreement, not to make public parts thereof which

contain confidential information.
ARTICLE 18.14
Implementation of the final arbitral award
1. Each disputing party shall comply in good faith with the final arbitral award of the arbitration

panel. If, in its final arbitral award, the arbitration panel determines that a measure at issue is

inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement, or that the responding party has otherwise

2 For greater certainty, nothing in the final arbitral award may add to or diminish the rights and
obligations of the Parties under this Agreement.

12

failed to carry out its obligations under this Agreement, the responding party shall, whenever

possible, eliminate the non-conformity with this Agreement.

2. __No later than 30 (thirty) days after the issuance of the final arbitral award, the responding
party shall notify the complaining party of the time it will require to comply with the final arbitral
award (hereinafter referred to as the "reasonable period of time"), if immediate compliance is not

practicable. The disputing parties shall endeavour to agree on the reasonable period of time.

3. If the disputing parties fail to agree on the reasonable period of time within a period of 45
(forty-five) days after the issuance of the final arbitral award, a disputing party may, no later than
50 (fifty) days after the issuance of the final arbitral award, request in writing to the original
arbitration panel to determine the length of the reasonable period of time. Such request shall be
notified simultaneously to the other disputing party. The original arbitration panel shall issue its
determination to the disputing parties no later than 20 (twenty) days after the date of the submission

of the request.

4. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer available, the
procedures set out in Article 18.9 (Composition and establishment of the arbitration panel) shall
apply. The time limit for issuing the determination on the length of the reasonable period of time
shall be no later than 35 (thirty-five) days? after the date of the submission of the request referred to
in paragraph 3.

5. The responding party shall inform the complaining party in writing of its progress to comply
with the final arbitral award at least 30 (thirty) days before the expiry of the reasonable period of
time.

6. | The reasonable period of time may be extended by mutual agreement of the disputing parties.

7. The responding party shall notify the complaining party before the end of the reasonable

period of time of any measure that it has taken to comply with the final arbitral award.

3 For greater certainty, the period of 35 (thirty-five) days does not include any days suspended

pursuant to Article 18.9 (Composition and establishment of the arbitration panel).

13

8. in the event of a disagreement between the disputing parties concerning the existence or the
consistency of any measure notified under paragraph 7 with the provisions referred to in Article
18.2 (Scope), the complaining party may request in writing the original arbitration panel to make a
determination on the matter. Such request shall be notified simultaneously to the responding party,
and shall identify any specific measure at issue and explain why that measure does not comply with
the provisions referred to in Article 18.2 (Scope) in a manner sufficient to present the disagreement
clearly. The original arbitration panel shall issue to the disputing parties its determination no later

than 45 (forty-five) days after the date of the submission of the request.

9. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer available, the
procedures set out in Article 18.9 (Composition and establishment of the arbitration panel) shall
apply. The time limit for issuing the determination shall be no later than 60 (sixty) days‘ after the

date of the submission of the request referred to in paragraph 8.

ARTICLE 18.15
Compensation and suspension of concessions or other obligations

1. ‘If the responding party fails to notify any measure taken to comply with the final arbitral
award in accordance with Article 18.14(7) (Implementation of the final arbitral award), or if the
arbitration panel determines that any measure notified under Article 18.14(7) (Implementation of
the final arbitral award) does not exist or is inconsistent with any provision referred to in Article
18.2 (Scope), the responding party shall enter into negotiations with the complaining party, with a

view to reaching a mutually acceptable agreement on compensation.
2. If the disputing parties fail to agree on compensation within 30 (thirty) days after:
(a) The expiry of the reasonable period of time referred to in Article 18.14(7); or

4 For greater certainty, the period of 60 (sixty) days does not include any days suspended pursuant
to Article 18.9 (Composition and establishment of the arbitration panel).

14

(b) The issuance of an arbitration panel determination that any measure notified under Article
18.14(7) (Implementation of the final arbitral award) does not exist or is inconsistent with any

provision referred to in Article 18.2 (Scope),

as the case may be, the complaining party shall be entitled, upon notification to the responding
party, to suspend concessions or obligations arising from any provision referred to in Article 18.2
(Scope) at a level equivalent to the nullification or impairment caused by the violation. The
notification shall specify the level of concessions or other obligations that the complaining party
intends to suspend and indicate the reasons on which the suspension is based. The complaining
party may begin implementing the suspension 20 (twenty) days after the delivery of its notification

to the responding party, subject to paragraph 4.

3. In considering what concessions or other obligations to suspend pursuant to paragraph 2:

(a) The complaining party should first seek to suspend concessions or other obligations with
respect to the same sector(s) as that in which the final arbitral award of the arbitration panel
referred to in Article 18.13 (Interim report and final arbitral award) has found an

inconsistency with the obligations under this Agreement;

(b) If the complaining party considers that it is not practicable or effective to suspend concessions
or other obligations with respect to the same sector(s), it may suspend concessions or other

obligations with respect to other sector(s), indicating the reasons that justify its decision; and

(c) The complaining party will take into consideration those concessions or other obligations the

suspension of which would least disturb the functioning of this Agreement.

4. — If the responding party considers that the concessions or other obligations that the
complaining party intends to suspend are manifestly excessive or that there is no reasonable
justification to apply the suspension of concessions according to subparagraph (b) of paragraph 3, it
may request in writing the original arbitration panel to make a determination on the matter. Such
request shall be notified to the complaining party before the expiry of the 20-day (twenty-day)
period referred to in paragraph 2. The complaining party shall submit to the original arbitration

panel the methodology used to calculate the level of the suspension of concessions or other

15

obligations within the timeframe stipulated by the original arbitration panel. The original arbitration
panel having sought, if appropriate, the opinion of experts according to Article 18.12(6)
(Proceedings of the arbitration panel) shall issue to the disputing parties its determination on the
level of the suspension of concessions or other obligations and on the reasons indicated by the
complaining party to suspend concessions according to subparagraph (b) of paragraph 3 no later
than 30 (thirty) days after the date of the submission of the request. Concessions or other
obligations shall not be suspended until the arbitration panel has issued its determination, and any

suspension shall be consistent with the arbitration panel’s determination.

5. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer available, the
procedures laid down in Article 18.9 (Composition and establishment of the arbitration panel) shall
apply. The time limit for issuing the determination shall be no later than 45 (forty-five) days? after

the date of the submission of the request referred to in paragraph 4.

6. | The compensation referred to in paragraph | and the suspension referred to in paragraph 2 are
temporary measures. Neither compensation nor suspension is preferred to full elimination of any
non-conformity with this Agreement as determined in the final arbitral award of the arbitration
panel. Any suspension shall only be applied until such time as the non-conformity is fully
eliminated, or the non-conformity is determined in accordance with Article 18.16 (Compliance
review) to have been eliminated, or the disputing parties have otherwise reached a mutually

satisfactory solution.

Article 18.16
Compliance review

1. If the responding party considers that it has eliminated the non-conformity with this
Agreement as originally determined by the arbitration panel's final arbitral award, it may request in
writing the original arbitration panel to make a determination on the matter. Such request shall be

notified simultaneously to the complaining party. The original arbitration panel shall issue to the

S For greater certainty, the period of 45 (forty-five) days does not include any days suspended
pursuant to Article 18.9 (Composition and establishment of the arbitration panel).

16

disputing parties its determination no later than 45 (forty-five) days after the date of the submission
of the request. If the arbitration panel determines that the responding party has eliminated the non-
conformity with the provisions referred to in Article 18.2 (Scope), the complaining party shall cease

to apply any suspension of concessions or other obligations that it has implemented.

2. In the event that any member of the original arbitration panel is no longer available, the
procedures set out in Article 18.9 (Composition and establishment of the arbitration panel) shall
apply. The time limit for issuing the determination shall be no later than 60 (sixty)® days after the

date of the submission of the request referred to in paragraph 1.

ARTICLE 18.17
Suspension and termination of arbitration procedures

1. The arbitration panel shall, at the written request of both disputing parties, suspend its work at
any time for a period agreed by the disputing parties, not exceeding 12 (twelve) months, and shall
resume its work at the end of the agreed period at the written request of the complaining party, or
before the end of this agreed period at the written request of both disputing parties. If the
complaining party does not request the resumption of the arbitration panel's work before the expiry
of the agreed suspension period, the dispute settlement procedures initiated under this Chapter shall

be deemed terminated, unless the disputing parties agree otherwise.
2. The disputing parties may, at any time, agree in writing to terminate the dispute settlement
procedures initiated under this Chapter.
ARTICLE 18.18
Rules of procedure

6 For greater certainty, the period of 60 (sixty) days does not include any days suspended
pursuant to Article 18.9 (Composition and establishment of the arbitration panel).

17

Dispute settlement procedures under this Chapter shall be governed by Annex 18-A (Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration).

ARTICLE 18.19

Rules of interpretation

The arbitration panel shall interpret the provisions referred to in Article 18.2 (Scope) in accordance
with customary rules of interpretation of public international law, including those codified in the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, done at Vienna on 23 May 1969 (hereinafter referred to
as the "Vienna Convention")

ARTICLE 18.20

Expenses

The costs of arbitration shall be borne by the disputing parties in equal shares, unless otherwise
agreed by the disputing parties. Each disputing party shall bear its own expenses and legal costs.

ARTICLE 18.21

Time limits

1. — All time limits laid down in this Chapter shall be counted in calendar days, the first day being

the day following the act or fact to which they refer, unless otherwise specified.

2. Any time limit referred to in this Chapter may be modified by mutual agreement of the disputing

parties.

18

CHAPTER 19

INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 19.1

Joint Committee

1. The Parties hereby establish a Joint Committee comprising delegates of Singapore and
MERCOSUR, represented by the National Coordinators of the Common Market Group of each
Signatory MERCOSUR State or their representatives.

2. The first meeting of the Joint Committee shall be held within one year after the entry into
force of this Agreement. Thereafter, the Joint Committee shall meet every two years, unless the
Parties agree otherwise. The Joint Committee shall be co-chaired by a representative of Singapore
and a representative of MERCOSUR. The Joint Committee shall agree on its meeting schedule and
set its agenda. The Joint Committee may meet in person or by any other means, as mutually agreed

by the Parties.

3. The Joint Committee shall:

(a) oversee and ensure the general functioning of this Agreement;

(b) supervise and facilitate the implementation and application of this Agreement, and further its

general aims;

(c) supervise the work of all subcommittees, working groups and other bodies established under

this Agreement;

(d) consider ways to further enhance trade relations between the Parties;

(e) seek to prevent or solve any issues that may arise in relation to the interpretation and
1

(f)

(g)

(a)

(b)

(c)

application of the Agreement without prejudice to Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement);
examine any effects of an accession of a third country to MERCOSUR pursuant to
Article.19.16 (Accessions to MERCOSUR) and, where appropriate, put in place any
necessary adjustments or transition arrangements; and

consider any other matter of interest relating to an area covered by this Agreement.

The Joint Committee may:

decide to establish or dissolve any subcommittee, working group or other body, or allocate

responsibilities or functions to it;

communicate with all interested parties including private sector and civil society

organisations;

consider or adopt decisions to modify, in fulfilment of the objectives of this Agreement:

(i) Annex 2-A of Chapter 2 (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods), including
its Appendices;

(11) Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin) and its Annexes;

(411) Annex 13-A of Chapter 13 (Government Procurement), including its Appendices;

(iv) Annex I (Schedules of Specific Commitments for Investment), Annex II (Schedules of
Specific Commitments for Services), and Annex III (Schedules of Reservations and

Non-conforming Measures for Services and Investment);

(v) Annex 15-A1, Annex 15-A2 and Annex 15-A3 of Chapter 15 (Intellectual Property
Rights); or

(vi) any other areas that the Joint Committee may agree upon;

(d) adopt interpretations of the provisions of this Agreement, which shall be binding on the
Parties and all bodies set up under this Agreement including arbitration panels or arbitral

tribunals referred to under Chapter 9 (Investment) and Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement);

(e) adopt decisions or make recommendations as envisaged by this Agreement;

(f) adopt its own rules of procedure; and

(g) take any other action in the exercise of its functions as the Parties may agree.

ARTICLE 19.2

Subcommittees, working groups and other bodies

1. The composition, responsibilities and functions of subcommittees, working groups or any
other bodies may be set out either by relevant provisions of this Agreement or by the Joint

Committee acting consistently with this Agreement.

2. The subcommittees, working groups or any other bodies shall inform the Joint Committee of
their schedule and agenda sufficiently in advance of their meetings. They may meet in person or by
any other means, as mutually agreed by the Parties. They shall report to the Joint Committee on

their activities at each regular meeting of the Joint Committee.

3. The Joint Committee may decide to change or undertake for itself any responsibility or

function assigned to a subcommittee, a working group or any other body.

4. The creation or existence of a subcommittee, a working group or any other body shall not

prevent a Party from bringing any matter directly to the Joint Committee.

5. With respect to matters related to their area of competence, the subcommittees shall have the

power to:

(a) monitor the implementation and ensure the proper functioning of this Agreement, and

collaborate with the Joint Committee and other subcommittees for this purpose;
3

(b) adopt by agreement of the Parties recommendations and draft decisions proposed to be taken
by the Joint Committee in accordance with Article 19.3 (Decision-making), related to all

matters where this Agreement so provides;

(c) discuss issues arising from the implementation of this Agreement or of any supplementing
agreement with a view to resolving them, without prejudice to Chapter 18 (Dispute

Settlement); and

(d) provide a forum for the Parties to exchange information, discuss best practices and share

implementation experience.

6. The tasks of the subcommittees are further defined as appropriate in the relevant chapters of

this Agreement and can be modified, if necessary, by decision of the Joint Committee.

ARTICLE 19.3

Decision-making

1. Where provided for in this Agreement, the Joint Committee may adopt decisions which shall
be binding on the Parties. The Parties shall take the necessary measures to implement such

decisions.

2. The Joint Committee and other subcommittees may make appropriate recommendations,

where provided for in this Agreement.

3. Decisions and recommendations under this Agreement shall be adopted by consensus among

the Parties.

4. If a decision adopted by the Joint Committee requires the fulfilment of internal procedures by
any of the Parties, the decision shall enter into force on the date that the last Party notifies that its
internal requirements have been fulfilled, unless otherwise agreed. The Joint Committee may decide

that such decisions may be applicable for those Parties that have fulfilled their internal

requirements, provided that at least one Signatory MERCOSUR State, of the one part, and

Singapore, of the other part, are among those Parties.
5. Incase the Joint Committee considers or adopts decisions to modify parts of the Agreement,
as per subparagraph (c) of Article 19.1 (4) (Joint Committee), the Parties may indicate, in
accordance with their laws and regulations, whether they need to submit such modification to
further internal processes, including ratification, acceptance or approval.

ARTICLE 19.4

Contact points

1. For the purposes of this Agreement, all communications or notifications to or by a Party shall

be made through its contact point.

2. The contact points of the Parties are:

(a) for MERCOSUR, National Coordinators of the Common Market Group of the Signatory
MERCOSUR States, or its successors; and

(b) for Singapore, the Director of Americas Division, Ministry of Trade and Industry, or its

successor.

3. Each Party shall notify the other Parties of any changes in its contact point in due time.

ARTICLE 19.5
Relations with other agreements
1. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other under

existing bilateral and multilateral agreements to which they are party, including the WTO

Agreement.

2. If a Party considers that a provision of this Agreement is inconsistent with a provision of
another agreement to which that Party and at least one other Party are party, the relevant Parties
which are party to the other agreement shall immediately consult each other with a view to finding a
mutually satisfactory solution. This paragraph shall be without prejudice to a Party's rights and
obligations under Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement).!

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, if this Agreement explicitly contains provisions dealing with

such inconsistency as indicated in paragraph 2, those provisions shall apply.

4. For the purposes of this Agreement, any reference to articles in GATT 1994 or GATS

includes the interpretative notes, where applicable.

ARTICLE 19.6

Evolving WTO Law

If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated into this Agreement is
amended, the Parties shall consult with each other, via the Joint Committee, with a view to finding a
mutually satisfactory solution, where necessary. As a result of such a review, the Parties may, by

decision of the Joint Committee, amend or modify this Agreement accordingly.

ARTICLE 19.7

General Exceptions

1. Article XX (General Exceptions) of GATT 1994 and its interpretive notes are incorporated

into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis, for the purposes of:

1 For greater certainty, the Parties agree that the fact that an agreement provides more favourable

treatment of goods, services, investment, or persons than that provided for under this Agreement
does not mean that there is an inconsistency within the meaning of paragraph 2.
6

(a) Chapter 2 (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods), Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin),
Chapter 5 (Trade Remedies), Chapter 7 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), Chapter 8
(Technical Barriers to Trade), Chapter 4 (Customs and Trade Facilitation); and

(b) Chapter 12 (Electronic Commerce), except to the extent that a provision of these Chapters

applies to services or investment.

2. Article XIV (a), (b) and (c) (General Exceptions) of GATS (including its footnotes) is

incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis, for the purposes of:

(a) Chapter 10 (Trade in Services) and Chapter 11 (Movement of Natural Persons); and

(b) Chapter 12 (Electronic Commerce), to the extent that a provision of these Chapters applies to

services.

3. Article XIV (a), (b) and (c) (General Exceptions) of GATS (including its footnotes) and Article

XX(g) (General Exceptions) of GATT are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis

mutandis, for the purposes of Chapter 9 (Investment Chapter).

ARTICLE 19.8

Security exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a) to require a Party to furnish any information the disclosure of which it considers to be

contrary to its essential security interests; or

(b) to prevent a Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for the protection of its

essential security interests:

(1) relating to the supply of services as carried out directly or indirectly for the purposes of

provisioning a military establishment;

(11) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such traffic in
other goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purposes of

supplying a military establishment;

(111) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials from which they are

derived;

(iv) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or

(c) to prevent a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations under the United

Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security.

ARTICLE 19.9

Taxation

1. | Except as provided for in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to taxation

measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of a State Party under any tax
agreement. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any such agreement, that
agreement shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. The competent authorities of the States
Parties shall have sole responsibility for determining whether any inconsistency exists between this

Agreement and that agreement.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, Article 2.3 (National Treatment) of Chapter 2 (National
Treatment and Market Access for Goods) and other provisions of this Agreement necessary to give
effect to that Article shall apply to taxation measures to the same extent as does Article III (National
Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation) of GATT 1994.

4. For the purposes of this Article:

(a) "competent authorities" means:

(b)

(i) For Singapore, the Chief Tax Policy Officer, Ministry of Finance, or the competent
authority designated under any tax agreement between the State Parties, as the case may be,
or their successor or such other public officer as may be designated by Singapore; and

(11) For each Signatory MERCOSUR State, as indicated below:

(A) Argentina, the Minister of Economy or a designated representative;

(B) Brazil, the Minister of Finance and the Special Secretary of the Federal Revenue

of Brazil or their designated representatives;

(C) Paraguay, the Minister of Economy and Finance or a designated representative;

(D) Uruguay, the Minister of Economy and Finance or a designated representative;

or their respective successors;

"tax agreement" means an agreement for the avoidance of double taxation or other

international taxation agreement, arrangement or convention; and

"taxation measures" do not include:

(1) | customs duties as defined in Article 2.1 (Definitions) of Chapter 2 (National Treatment
and Market Access for Goods); or

(11) the measures listed in subparagraphs (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of customs duties definition

in Article 2.1 (Definitions) of Chapter 2 (National Treatment and Market Access for

Goods).

ARTICLE 19.10

Temporary safeguard measures

1. | Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as preventing a Party from adopting or
maintaining measures that restrict the transfers or payments from the current account in the event of

serious balance of payment and external financial difficulties or a threat thereof.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as preventing a Party from adopting or

maintaining measures that restrict the transfers or payments related to capital movements:

(a) in the event of serious balance of payment and external financial difficulties or a threat

thereof, or

(b) when, in extraordinary circumstances, payments or transfers relating to capital movements
cause or threaten to cause serious difficulties in macroeconomic management, in particular in

monetary or foreign exchange policy.

3. Any measure that is adopted or maintained in accordance with paragraphs | and 2 must:

(a) be applied in a non-discriminatory manner so that no Party receives a less favourable

treatment than any other Party or non-party;

(b) be consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the IMF;

(c) prevent unnecessary damage to commercial, economic and financial interests of another

Party;

(d) not go beyond that which is necessary to overcome the circumstances set out in paragraphs |

or 2; and

(e) be temporary and progressively withdrawn as soon as the circumstances set out in paragraphs

1 and 2 improve.

4. With regard to trade of goods, no provision of this Agreement shall be construed as
preventing a Party from adopting measures to restrict importations in order to safeguard its external
financial position or balance of payments. These measures which restrict importations must be
consistent with GATT 1994 and the Understanding of the Balance of Payments Provisions of GATT

1994.
10

5. With regard to trade in services, no provision in this Agreement shall be construed as
preventing a Party from taking restrictive trade measures in order to safeguard its external financial

position or balance of payments. These restrictive measures must be consistent with GATS.
6. A Party that adopts or maintains measures in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2, 4 or 5 shall:

(a) provide, with no undue delay, notice of the measures adopted or maintained to the other

Parties, including any modification thereof; and

(b) with no undue delay commence consultations with the other Parties to make their best efforts

to review, whenever possible, the measures that it has previously maintained or adopted’:

(1) in the case of capital movements, respond to any other Party that makes an enquiry on
the measures adopted by the former Party, provided that said enquiry is not made

outside the framework of this Agreement.

(11) in the case of current account transactions, provided that consultations related to the
measures adopted are not carried out before the WTO, a Party shall, if required to,

promptly commence consultations with any interested Party.

ARTICLE 19.11
Disclosure of information

1. | Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to make available confidential
information, the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the
public interest, or which would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of a particular juridical

person, public or private.

2 For the avoidance of doubt, the term "consultations" in this Article does not refer to the
consultations under Article 18.6 (Consultations) of Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement), and the
term "review" in this Article does not require a Party to obtain the agreement from any other
Party referred to under paragraph 6(b)(i) or any interested Party referred to under paragraph
6(b)(i1) in order to adopt or maintain safeguard measures in accordance with this provision.

11

2. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, where a Party provides information to
another Party (or to the Joint Committee, subcommittees, working groups or any other bodies) in
accordance with this Agreement and designates the information as confidential, the Party (or the
Joint Committee, subcommittees, working groups or any other bodies) receiving the information
shall maintain the confidentiality of the information, use it only for the purposes specified by the
Party providing the information, and not disclose it without specific written permission of the Party

providing the information.

ARTICLE 19.12

Amendments

1. The State Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. An amendment shall enter
into force on the first day of the second month following the date on which the State Parties have
exchanged written notifications certifying that they have completed their respective applicable legal

requirements, or in any manner otherwise agreed upon by the Parties.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the Joint Committee may adopt any modification to this
Agreement, where provided for in subparagraph (c) of Article 19.1 (4) (Joint Committee).

3. Incase the Parties consider or adopt decisions to amend this Agreement pursuant to paragraph
1, the State Parties may indicate, in accordance with their laws and regulations, whether they need
to submit such amendment to further internal processes, including ratification, acceptance or

approval.

ARTICLE 19.13

Entry into force

1. This Agreement shall be ratified by each Signatory MERCOSUR State and Singapore in

accordance with their respective legal requirements. The instruments of ratification shall be

deposited with the Depositary. The Depositary shall promptly notify each Signatory MERCOSUR
12

State and Singapore, and provide them with the date and a copy of the deposit of an instrument of

ratification.

2. This Agreement shall enter into force for the Signatory MERCOSUR States that have
deposited their instruments of ratification and Singapore, on the first day of the second month
following the date on which at least Singapore and one Signatory MERCOSUR State have

deposited their instruments of ratification with the Depositary.

3. After the entry into force of this Agreement pursuant to paragraph 2, for any Signatory
MERCOSUR State for which this Agreement has not entered into force, this Agreement shall enter
into force on the first day of the second month following the date on which said Signatory
MERCOSUR State has deposited its instrument of ratification with the Depositary. This Agreement
shall enter into force for MERCOSUR on the first day of the second month following the date on
which all Signatory MERCOSUR States have deposited their instruments of ratification with the

Depositary.

ARTICLE 19.14

Transitional provisions

1. | Until this Agreement enters into force for all Signatory MERCOSUR States, the rights and

obligations under this Agreement shall only apply to the Signatory MERCOSUR States for which

this Agreement is in force and Singapore, according to the following provisions.

2. Any reference to:

(a) "MERCOSUR" shall be understood to refer to such Signatory MERCOSUR States for which

this Agreement is in force; and

(b) "Parties" and "State Parties" shall be understood to refer to such Signatory MERCOSUR State

or States for which this Agreement is in force and Singapore.

13

ARTICLE 19.15

Duration

1. | This Agreement shall be valid indefinitely.

2. MERCOSUR and the Signatory MERCOSUR States may collectively terminate this
Agreement by means of a written notification to the Depositary. Singapore may terminate this

Agreement by means of a written notification to the Depositary.

3. This Agreement shall be terminated 6 (six) months after the notification pursuant to paragraph
2. This is without prejudice to specific provisions in this Agreement which qualify the effect of the

termination, namely, Article 9.17 (Savings Clause) of Chapter 9 (Investment).

4. Within 30 (thirty) days of delivery of a notification under paragraph 2, a Party may request
consultations regarding whether the termination of any provision of this Agreement should take
effect at a later date than provided under paragraph 2. Such consultations shall commence within 30

days of a Party's delivery of such request.

5. | The Agreement shall terminate for any Signatory MERCOSUR State which withdraws from
the Treaty of Asuncion, on the same date the withdrawal from the Treaty of Asuncion takes place.
MERCOSUR shall promptly notify Singapore of any intent formally expressed by a Signatory
MERCOSUR State of such withdrawal.

6. If a Signatory MERCOSUR State withdraws from the Treaty of Asuncion, this Agreement

shall remain in force for MERCOSUR, the remaining Signatory MERCOSUR States and for

Singapore.

ARTICLE 19.16

Annexes and Appendices

The Annexes and Appendices to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof.

14

ARTICLE 19.17

Accessions to MERCOSUR
1. The accession to this Agreement of any Member State of MERCOSUR which is not an
original Signatory MERCOSUR State shall be on terms and conditions mutually agreed among the
original State Parties to this Agreement and the acceding party through negotiations. Such accession
shall be done through an additional protocol to this Agreement.
2. MERCOSUR shall promptly notify Singapore of the outcome of accession negotiations with a
candidate country for accession to MERCOSUR and of the entry into force of any accession to

MERCOSUR.

3. Nothing in this Article prejudices the Parties' rights under Article 19.15 (Duration).

ARTICLE 19.18
Territorial application

This Agreement shall apply:

(a) with respect to MERCOSUR and the Signatory MERCOSUR States, to the territory of the
Signatory MERCOSUR States as defined in Article 1.3 (Definitions of General Application)
of Chapter | (Initial Provisions and General Definitions); and

(b) with respect to Singapore, to its territory as defined in Article 1.3 (Definitions of General
Application) of Chapter 1 (Initial Provisions and General Definitions).

ARTICLE 19.19

Depositary

15

The Government of the Republic of Paraguay shall act as Depositary of this Agreement and shall

notify all Parties that have signed or acceded to this Agreement of the deposit of any instrument of

ratification or provisional application, the entry into force of this Agreement, of its termination or of

any withdrawal therefrom.
