RECOGNising their longstanding and strong friendship and the need to
strengthen their close economic relations;

CONVINCED that a free trade area will create an expanded and secure market
for goods and services in their territories and a stable and predictable
environment for investment, thus enhancing the competitiveness of their firms
in global markets;

RECOGNising the need to strengthen the framework for broader and deeper
economic cooperation;

DESIRING to promote economic growth and create new employment
opportunities;

RECOGNising the different levels of economic development between the
Parties;

DESIRING to strengthen a mutually beneficial cooperative framework to foster
creativity and innovation, and to promote stronger linkages in and between the
dynamic sectors of their economies;

SEEKING to establish clear and mutually advantageous rules governing their
trade and investment and to reduce or eliminate the barriers to such trade and
investment between them;

DESIRING to promote a predictable, transparent, and consistent business
environment that will assist enterprises in planning effectively and using
resources efficiently;

RESOLVED to contribute to the harmonious development and expansion of
world trade by removing obstacles to trade through the creation of a free trade
area;

BUILDING on their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakesh

Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organisation and other multilateral,
regional, and bilateral agreements to which both Parties are party; and

-|-

REAFFIRMING their desire to build upon their commitments under the
Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation among the
Governments of the Republic of Korea and the Member Countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations as well as other relevant agreements
pursuant to the Framework Agreement,

HAVE AGREED as follows:

CHAPTER ONE
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1.1: Establishment of a Free Trade Area

The Parties, consistent with Article XXIV of GATT 1994 and Article V of
GATS, hereby establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of

this Agreement.

Article 1.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Agreement are to:

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

achieve the substantial liberalisation of trade in goods between
the Parties, in conformity with Article XXIV of GATT 1994;

achieve the substantial liberalisation of trade in services
between the Parties, in conformity with Article V of GATS;

mutually enhance investment opportunities;

promote competition in their economies, particularly as it
relates to economic relations between the Parties;

bring substantial benefits to the Parties, with special
consideration for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(MSMEs);

develop appropriate cooperation initiatives in the fields of
innovation and research and development; and

establish a framework to enhance closer cooperation in the
fields agreed upon by the Parties in this Agreement.

Article 1.3: Relation to Other Agreements

1. The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under the WTO
Agreement, the Korea-ASEAN FTA, and any other agreements to which both
Parties are party.

2. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, in the event of any
inconsistency between this Agreement and another agreement to which both
Parties are party, the Parties shall immediately consult with each other with a
view to finding a mutually satisfactory solution.

Article 1.4: Extent of Obligations

Each Party shall, subject to the provisions of this Agreement, ensure the
observance of all obligations and commitments under this Agreement by its
regional and local governments and authorities, and by non-governmental
bodies in the exercise of governmental powers delegated to them by central,
regional and local governments or authorities.

Article 1.5: General Definitions
For purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified,

Agreement on Agriculture means the Agreement on Agriculture, in Annex 1A
to the WTO Agreement;

Anti-Dumping Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article
VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, in Annex 1A to the
WTO Agreement;

customs authority means the authority that, in accordance with the legislation
of each Party, is responsible for the administration and enforcement of its
customs laws and regulations:

(a) for Korea, the Ministry of Economy and Finance or the Korea
Customs Service, or their respective successors; and

(b) for the Philippines, the Bureau of Customs, or its successor;

customs duties means any customs or import duty and a charge of any kind,
including any form of surtax or surcharge, imposed in connection with the
importation of a good, but does not include any:

(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with
Article HI:2 of GATT 1994, in respect of like, directly
competitive, or substitutable goods of a Party, or in respect of
goods from which the imported good has been manufactured or
produced in whole or in part;

(b) duty imposed pursuant to a Party’s laws and regulations
consistent with Chapter Three (Trade Remedies);

(c) fee or other charge in connection with importation
commensurate with the cost of services rendered;

(d) premiums offered or collected on an imported good arising out
of any tendering system in respect of the administration of
quantitative import restrictions or tariff rate quotas; or

(e) duty imposed pursuant to any agricultural safeguard measure
taken under the Agreement on Agriculture;

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of
Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, in Annex 1A
to the WTO Agreement;

days means calendar days, including weekends and holidays;
existing means in effect on the date of the entry into force of this Agreement;

GATS means the General Agreement on Trade in Services, in Annex 1B to the
WTO Agreement;

GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994,
including its notes and supplementary provisions, which is a part of the WTO
Agreement;

goods means any merchandise, product, article, or material;

Harmonised System (HS) means the nomenclature of the Harmonised
Commodity Description and Coding System defined in the International
Convention on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System,
including all legal notes thereto, as in force and as amended from time to time;

Joint Committee means the Korea-Philippines Free Trade Agreement Joint
Committee established under Article 11.1 (Joint Committee);

juridical person means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised
under applicable laws and regulations, whether for profit or otherwise, and
whether privately-owned or governmentally-owned, including any corporation,
trust, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship, or association;

Korea-ASEAN FTA means the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive

Economic Cooperation among the Governments of the Republic of Korea and
the Member Countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and other

-3-

relevant agreements stipulated in paragraph | of Article 1.4 of the Framework
Agreement;

measure means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation,
rule, procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other form;

measures adopted or maintained by a Party means measures adopted or
maintained by:

(a) central, regional, or local governments and authorities; and

(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by
central, regional, or local governments and authorities;

national means:

(a) for Korea, a Korean national within the meaning of the
Nationality Act, as amended; and

(b) for the Philippines, a Filipino national as defined in its
Constitution, as amended;

originating goods means products or materials that qualify as originating under
Chapter Four (Rules of Origin);

person means a natural person or a juridical person;

preferential tariff treatment means tariff concessions granted to originating
goods as reflected by the tariff rates applicable under this Agreement;

Safeguards Agreement means the Agreement on Safeguards, in Annex 1A to
the WTO Agreement;

SCM Agreement means the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing
Measures, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

territory means:

(a) for Korea, the land, maritime, and airspace under its
sovereignty, and those maritime areas, including the seabed and
subsoil adjacent to and beyond the outer limit of the territorial
seas over which it may exercise sovereign rights or jurisdiction
in accordance with international law and its domestic law; and

(b) for the Philippines, the national territory as defined in Article I
of its Constitution. The term “national territory” also includes
the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf over
which the Philippines exercises sovereign rights or jurisdiction
in accordance with its laws and regulations and under
international law;

Trade Facilitation Agreement means the Agreement on Trade Facilitation, in
Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;

WTO means the World Trade Organisation; and

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World
Trade Organisation, done on 15 April 1994.

CHAPTER TWO
TRADE IN GOODS

Article 2.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:

consular transactions means requirements that goods of a Party intended for
export to the territory of the other Party must first be submitted to the
supervision of the consul of the importing Party in the territory of the exporting
Party for the purpose of obtaining consular invoices or consular visas for
commercial invoices, certificates of origin, manifests, shippers’ export
declarations, or any other customs documentation required on or in connection
with importation; and

import licensing means an administrative procedure requiring the submission
of an application or other documentation (other than that required for customs
purposes) to the relevant administrative body as a prior condition for
importation into the territory of the importing Party.

Article 2.2: Objectives

The Parties shall liberalise trade in goods under this Agreement, in conformity
with Article XXIV of GATT 1994.

Article 2.3: Scope and Coverage

Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply to
trade in goods between the Parties.

Article 2.4: Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall reduce
or eliminate its customs duties on originating goods of the other Party in
accordance with its respective Schedule of Tariff Commitments reflected in
Annex 2-A.

2. In accordance with the WTO Agreement, originating goods of the other

Party shall be eligible, at the time of importation, for the most-favoured-nation
(MEN) applied rate of customs duty for those goods in a Party, where that MFN

applied rate is lower than the preferential rate of customs duty provided for in
that Party’s Schedule of Tariff Commitments. Subject to each Party’s laws and
regulations, each Party shall provide that an importer may apply for a refund of
any excess duty paid for a good if the importer did not make a claim for the
lower MEN rate applicable at the time of importation.

3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall
increase any existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty, on
originating goods of the other Party, as provided in its Schedule of Tariff
Commitments.

Article 2.5: Acceleration of Tariff Commitments

1. A Party may, at any time, unilaterally improve or accelerate its tariff
commitments set out in its Schedule of Tariff Commitments. Such Party shall
inform the other Party as early as practicable before the new preferential rate of
customs duty takes effect.

2. Upon request of a Party, the Parties will consult to consider accelerating
the reduction or elimination of customs duties set out in their respective
Schedule of Tariff Commitments. An agreement by the Parties to accelerate the
reduction or elimination of a customs duty on a good shall supersede any duty
rate or staging category determined pursuant to their respective Schedules of
Tariff Commitments reflected in Annex 2-A.

3. Following a unilateral improvement or acceleration of its tariff
commitments referred to in Paragraph 1, a Party may raise its preferential
customs duty to a level not in excess of that set out in its Schedule of Tariff
Commitments for that year. Such Party shall inform the other Party of the date
from which the new preferential rate of customs duty comes into effect as early
as practicable before such date.

Article 2.6: Classification of Goods

The classification of goods in trade between the Parties shall be in conformity
with the Harmonised System (HS).

Article 2.7: Agricultural Export Subsidies

The Parties reaffirm their commitments made in the 2015 Ministerial Decision

on Export Competition, adopted in Nairobi, including elimination of scheduled
export subsidy entitlements for agriculture goods.

Article 2.8: Goods in Transit

Each Party shall continue to facilitate customs clearance of goods in transit from
or to the other Party in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article V of GATT 1994
and the relevant provisions of the Trade Facilitation Agreement.

Article 2.9: Temporary Admission of Goods

1. Each Party shall allow, as provided for in its laws and regulations, goods
to be brought into its customs territory conditionally relieved, totally or partially,
from payment of import duties and taxes, if such goods:

(a) are brought into its customs territory for a specific purpose;
(b) are intended for re-exportation within a specific period; and

(c) have not undergone any change, except normal depreciation and
wastage due to the use made of them.

2. Each Party shall, at the request of the person concerned and for reasons
its customs authority considers valid, extend the time limit for duty-free
temporary admission provided for in paragraph 1 beyond the period initially
fixed.

3. Neither Party shall condition the duty-free temporary admission of a
good provided for in paragraph 1, other than to require that the good:

(a) be used solely by or under the personal supervision of a national
or resident of the other Party in the exercise of the business
activity, trade, profession, or sport of that person;

(b) not be sold or leased while in its territory;

(c) be accompanied by a security or guarantee in an amount no
greater than the customs duties, taxes, fees, and charges that
would otherwise be owed on entry or final importation,
releasable on exportation of the good;

(d) be capable of identification when imported and exported;

(e) be exported on the departure of the person referred to in
subparagraph (a), or within such other period related to the

purpose of the temporary admission as the Party may establish,
unless extended;

(f) be admitted in no greater quantity than is reasonable for its
intended use; and

(g) be otherwise admissible into the Party’s territory under its laws
and regulations.

4. If any condition that a Party imposes under paragraph 3 has not been
fulfilled, the Party may apply the customs duty and any other charge that would
normally be owed on the good in addition to any other charges or penalties
provided for under its laws and regulations.

5. Each Party shall permit a good temporarily admitted under this Article
to be re-exported through a customs port other than that through which it was
admitted.

Article 2.10: Customs Valuation

For purposes of determining the customs value of goods traded between the
Parties, Article VII of GATT 1994 and Part I of the Customs Valuation
Agreement shall apply and are hereby incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

Article 2.11: Quantitative Restrictions and Non-Tariff Measures

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party shall
adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction other than duties, taxes, or other
charges, whether made effective through quotas, import or export licenses, or
other measures, on the importation of any good of the other Party or on the
exportation of any good destined for the territory of the other Party, except in
accordance with its rights and obligations under the relevant provisions under
the WTO Agreement. To this end, Article XI of GATT 1994 shall apply and is
hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. In this regard, a Party shall not adopt or maintain any non-tariff measure
on the importation of any good of the other Party or on the exportation of any
good destined for the territory of the other Party, except in accordance with its
WTO rights and obligations or in accordance with this Agreement.

3. Each Party shall ensure the transparency of its non-tariff measures
permitted under paragraph 2 and shall ensure that any such measures are not

prepared, adopted, or applied with the view to or with the effect of creating
unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

Article 2.12: Import Licensing

1. With respect to the rights and obligations of the Parties concerning
import licensing, the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures in Annex 1A
to the WTO Agreement shall apply and is hereby incorporated into and made
part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. Within 30 days after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, each
Party shall notify the other Party of its existing import licensing procedures’, if
any. The notification shall:

(a) include the information specified in Article 5 of the Import
Licensing Agreement; and

(b) be without prejudice as to whether the import licensing
procedure is consistent with this Agreement.

3. Before applying any new or modified import licensing procedure, a
Party shall notify the other Party of the new procedure or modification, and to
the extent possible, publish in an official government website at least 20 days
before the new procedure or modification takes effect.

Article 2.13: Fees and Formalities

1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VIII:1 of GATT
1994, that all fees and charges of whatever character (other than import or export
duties, and other than taxes within the purview of Article HI of GATT 1994,
and any additional customs duty collected as a result of a measure consistent
with Chapter Three (Trade Remedies)) imposed on or in connection with
importation or exportation are limited in amount to the approximate cost of
services rendered and do not represent an indirect protection to domestic goods
or a taxation on imports or exports for fiscal purposes.

2. Each Party shall promptly publish details of the fees and charges that it

imposes in connection with importation or exportation and shall make such
information available on the internet.

' Existing import licensing procedures being referred to in this paragraph are those which
have not yet been notified to the WTO at the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

-5-

3. Neither Party shall require consular transactions, including related fees
and charges, in connection with the importation of a good of the other Party.

Article 2.14: National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation

Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in
accordance with Article II of GATT 1994. To this end, Article HI of GATT
1994 shall be incorporated into and shall form part of this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis.

Article 2.15: Agricultural Safeguard Measures

1. Notwithstanding Article 2.4, a Party may apply an agricultural safeguard
measure only up to the end of that particular year when it was imposed, in the
form of a higher import duty on an originating agricultural good listed in that
Party’s Schedule to Annex 2-B, consistent with paragraphs 2 through 7 if the
aggregate volume of imports of that good in any year exceeds a trigger level as
set out in its Schedule to Annex 2-B.

2. The duty under paragraph | shall not exceed the lesser of:

(a) the prevailing most-favoured-nation (MFN) applied rate;

(b) — the MFN applied rate of duty in effect on the day immediately
preceding the date of entry into force of this Agreement; or

(c) the duty rate set out in the applying Party’s Schedule to Annex
2-B.

3. The duties each Party applies under paragraph 1 shall be set according
to the maximum duty that may be applied each year for each such good in the

Party’s Schedule to Annex 2-B.

4. Neither Party may apply or maintain an agricultural safeguard measure
and at the same time apply or maintain, with respect to the same good:

(a) a bilateral transitional safeguard measure under Chapter Three
(Trade Remedies);

(b) a measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards
Agreement; or

(c) a measure under any agricultural safeguard provisions of the

Agreement on Agriculture in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement.

5. A Party shall implement any agricultural safeguard measure in a
transparent manner. Within 60 days after imposing a measure, the Party
applying the measure shall notify the other Party in writing and provide the other
Party with relevant data concerning the measure. On the written request of the
other Party, a Party shall consult with the other Party within 45 days upon receipt
of the written request regarding the application of the measure.

6. The implementation and operation of this Article may be the subject of
discussion and review in the Committee on Trade in Goods under Article 2.20.

7. Neither Party shall apply or maintain an agricultural safeguard measure
on an originating agricultural good if the period specified in the agricultural
safeguard provisions of the Party’s Schedule to Annex 2-B has expired.

Article 2.16: Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

l. The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to
each other under the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement.

2. Neither Party shall have recourse to Chapter Nine (Dispute Settlement)
for any matter arising under this Article.

Article 2.17: Technical Barriers to Trade

The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other
under the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement.

Article 2.18: Modification of Concessions

In exceptional circumstances, where a Party faces unforeseen difficulties in
implementing its tariff commitments, that Party may, subject to an agreement
with the other Party, modify or withdraw a concession contained in its schedule
of tariff commitments. In order to reach such agreement, a Party shall engage in
negotiations with the other Party. In such negotiations, the Party proposing to
modify or withdraw a concession shall maintain a level of reciprocal and
mutually advantageous concessions no less favourable to the other Party than that
provided for in this Agreement prior to such negotiations, which may include
compensatory adjustments with respect to other goods. The mutually agreed
outcome of the negotiations, including any compensatory adjustments, shall be

-7-

incorporated into this Agreement in accordance with Article 12.2
(Amendments).

Article 2.19: Contact Points

The Parties shall exchange contact details of focal points for this Chapter in
order to facilitate the communication and the exchange of information.

Article 2.20: Committee on Trade in Goods

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade in Goods composed
of government representatives of each Party.

2. The Committee on Trade in Goods may consider any matter arising
under this Chapter, including Annex 2-A.

3. The functions of the Committee on Trade in Goods shall include:

(a) monitoring the implementation and administration of this
Chapter, including utilisation of their respective preferences, and
undertaking consultations, as appropriate;

(b) preparing technical amendments, including the transposition of
the Tariff Elimination or Reduction Schedules according to the
amendments in the HS;

(c) reviewing and making appropriate recommendations to the Joint
Committee on matters arising from the implementation and
administration of the Chapter;

(d) addressing matters related to trade in goods between the Parties,
especially those related to quantitative restrictions, non-tariff
measures, and, if appropriate, referring such matters to the Joint
Committee for its consideration; and

(e) carrying out other functions as may be delegated by the Joint
Committee or agreed by the Parties.

4. The Committee on Trade in Goods shall strengthen their cooperation to
facilitate the exchange of information between the competent authorities of the
Parties, for purposes of carrying out the functions under paragraph 3.

5. The Committee on Trade in Goods shall meet at least once a year or as
otherwise agreed. Meetings may be conducted in person or by any technological
means available to the Parties.

6. The Committee on Trade in Goods shall report to the Joint Committee
on the results of its meetings.

CHAPTER THREE
TRADE REMEDIES

Section A: Safeguard Measures

Article 3.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Section:

bilateral transitional safeguard measure means a measure described in Article
3.2;

domestic industry means, with respect to an imported good, the producers as a
whole of the like or directly competitive good operating in the territory of a Party,
or those whose collective output of the like or directly competitive good constitutes
a major proportion of the total domestic production of that good;

serious injury means a significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic
industry;

substantial cause means a cause that is important and not less than any other cause;

threat of serious injury means serious injury that, on the basis of facts and not
merely on allegation, conjecture, or remote possibility, is clearly imminent; and

transition period means, in relation to a particular good, the period from the date
of entry into force of this Agreement until three years after the date of completion
of tariff reduction or elimination in accordance with a Party’s schedule of tariff
commitments in Annex 2-A (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties).

Article 3.2: Application of a Bilateral Transitional Safeguard Measure

1. If, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this
Agreement, an originating good of the other Party is being imported into the
territory of a Party in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to
domestic production, and under such conditions that the imports of such originating
good from the other Party constitute a substantial cause of serious injury, or threat

thereof, to a domestic industry producing a like or directly competitive good in the
territory of the importing Party, the Party may take a bilateral transitional safeguard
measure in the form of:

(a) suspending the further reduction of any rate of customs duty on the
good provided for under this Agreement; or

(b) increasing the rate of customs duty on the good to a level not to
exceed the lesser of:

(i) the most-favoured-nation (MFN) rate of duty applied at the
time the bilateral transitional safeguard measure is taken; or

(11) the MEN rate of duty applied on the day immediately
preceding the date of the entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 3.3: Conditions and Limitations

1. A Party shall notify the other Party in writing on the initiation of an
investigation described in paragraph 2 and shall consult with the other Party as far
in advance as practicable prior to applying a bilateral transitional safeguard
measure, with a view to reviewing the information arising from the investigation
and exchanging views on the bilateral transitional safeguard measure.

2. A Party shall apply a bilateral transitional safeguard measure only following
an investigation by the Party’s competent authorities in accordance with Articles 3
and 4.2(c) of the Safeguards Agreement, which are incorporated into and made part
of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

3. In the investigation described in paragraph 2, the Party shall comply with
the requirements of Articles 4.2(a) and 4.2(b) of the Safeguards Agreement, which

are incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

4. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities complete any such
investigation within one year from the date of its initiation.

5. Neither Party shall apply a bilateral transitional safeguard measure:

(a) except to the extent, and for such time, as may be necessary to
prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment;

(b) for a period exceeding two years, except that the period may be
extended by up to one year if the competent authorities of the
importing Party determine, in conformity with the procedures
specified in this Article, that the measure continues to be necessary
to prevent or remedy serious injury to facilitate adjustment and that
there is evidence that the industry is adjusting, provided that the total
period of application of a bilateral transitional safeguard measure,
including the period of initial application and any extension thereof,
shall not exceed three years; or

(c) beyond the expiration of the transition period.

6. A Party may apply a bilateral transitional safeguard measure more than once
against the same good, if deemed necessary, provided that at least two years has
elapsed since the completion of the period of application of a bilateral transitional
safeguard measure on the import of that product.

7. Where the expected duration of the bilateral transitional safeguard measure
is over one year, the importing Party shall progressively liberalise it at regular
intervals.

8. When a Party terminates a bilateral transitional safeguard measure, the
customs duty rate shall be the rate that, according to the Party’s Schedule in Annex
2-A (Reduction or Elimination of Customs Duties), would have been in effect but
for the measure.

Article 3.4: Provisional Measures

1. In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage that would be
difficult to repair, a Party may apply a bilateral transitional safeguard measure on a
provisional basis pursuant to a preliminary determination by its competent
authorities that there is clear evidence that imports of an originating good from the
other Party have increased as the result of the reduction or elimination of a customs
duty under this Agreement, and such imports constitute a substantial cause of
serious injury, or threat thereof, to the domestic industry.

2. Before a Party’s competent authorities may make a_ preliminary
determination, the Party shall publish a public notice setting out how interested
parties, including importers and exporters, may obtain a non-confidential copy of
the application requesting a provisional safeguard measure, and shall provide
interested parties at least 20 days after the date it publishes the notice to submit

evidence and views regarding the application of a provisional measure. A Party
may not apply a provisional measure until at least 45 days after the date its
competent authorities initiate an investigation.

3. The applying Party shall notify the other Party before applying a provisional
safeguard measure, and, on the request of the other Party, shall initiate consultations
after applying the measure.

4. The duration of any provisional measure shall not exceed 200 days, during
which time the Party shall comply with the requirements of Articles 3.3.2 and 3.3.3.

5. The applying Party shall promptly refund any tariff increase if the
investigation described in Article 3.3.2 does not result in a finding that the
requirements of Article 3.2 are met. The duration of any provisional measure shall
be counted as part of the period described in Article 3.3.5(b).

Article 3.5: Compensation

1. No later than 30 days after it applies a bilateral transitional safeguard
measure, the applying Party shall afford an opportunity for the other Party to consult
with it regarding appropriate trade liberalising compensation in the form of
concessions having substantially equivalent trade effects or equivalent to the value
of the additional duties expected to result from the bilateral transitional safeguard
measure. The applying Party shall provide such compensation as the Parties
mutually agree.

2. If the Parties are unable to agree on compensation through consultations
under paragraph | within 30 days from the beginning of the consultations, the Party
against whose originating good the bilateral transitional safeguard measure is
applied may suspend the application of concessions with respect to originating
goods of the applying Party that have trade effects substantially equivalent to the
safeguard measure.

3. The applying Party’s obligation to provide compensation under paragraph
1 and the other Party’s right to suspend concessions under paragraph 2 shall
terminate on the date the bilateral transitional safeguard measure terminates.

4. Any compensation shall be based on the total period of application of the
bilateral transitional safeguard measure, which includes the provisional safeguard
measures under Article 3.4.

5. The right of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall not be exercised for
the first 24 months during which a bilateral transitional safeguard measure is in
effect, provided that the bilateral transitional safeguard measure has been applied
as a result of an absolute increase in imports and that the bilateral transitional
safeguard measure conforms to the provisions of this Agreement.

Article 3.6: Global Safeguard Measures

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT
1994 and the Safeguards Agreement. This Agreement does not confer any
additional rights or obligations on the Parties with regard to actions taken under
Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement. In taking measures
under these WTO provisions, a Party shall, in accordance with WTO rules, exclude
imports of an originating product from the other Party if such imports do not in and
of themselves cause or threaten to cause serious injury.

2 Upon request of the other Party, the Party intending to take safeguard
measures shall promptly provide written notification of all pertinent information on
the initiation of a safeguard investigation, the preliminary determination, and the
final finding of the investigation.

3. Neither Party shall apply, with respect to the same good, at the same time:

(a) a bilateral transitional safeguard measure; and

(b) a measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards
Agreement.

Section B: Anti-Dumping and Countervailing Duties

Article 3.7: General Provisions

1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, each Party retains its
rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement with regard to the application of
anti-dumping and countervailing duties.

2. The Parties shall ensure, immediately after any imposition of provisional
measures and in any case before the final determination, full and meaningful
disclosure of all essential facts and considerations which form the basis for the

decision to apply measures, without prejudice to Article 6.5 of the Anti-Dumping
Agreement and Article 12.4 of the SCM Agreement. Disclosures shall be made in
writing, and interested parties shall be allowed sufficient time to make their
comments.

3. The Parties shall observe the following practices in anti-dumping or
countervailing cases between them in order to enhance transparency in the
implementation of the WTO Agreement:

(a) when dumping margins are established, assessed, or reviewed under
Articles 2, 9.3, 9.5, and 11 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement
regardless of the comparison bases under Article 2.4.2 of the Anti-
Dumping Agreement, all individual margins, whether positive or
negative, should be counted toward the average;

(b) if a decision is taken to impose an anti-dumping duty pursuant to
Article 9.1 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement, the Party taking such a
decision may apply the ‘lesser duty’ rule, by imposing a duty which
is less than the dumping margin where such lesser duty would be
adequate to remove the injury to the domestic industry; and

(c) the investigating Party shall request an exporter or producer in the
territory of the other Party for the timely response to its
questionnaires. When the investigating Party finds major deficiency
in information in a questionnaire response from relevant exporter or
producer received before the deadline or requires clarifications for
the purposes of investigation, the investigating Party shall demand
missing information or request clarification of information
concerning the answers to the questionnaires. This procedure shall
not be used to cause unwarranted delays in the investigation or to
circumvent the deadlines which are provided in the Party’s laws and
regulations. The Parties may make preliminary and_ final
determinations on the basis of the facts available pursuant to the
Anti-Dumping Agreement and SCM Agreement.

Article 3.8: Notification and Consultations

1. Upon receipt by a Party’s competent authorities of a properly documented
anti-dumping application with respect to imports from the other Party, and no later
than 15 days before initiating an investigation, the Party shall provide written
notification to the other Party of its receipt of the application and afford the other

Party a meeting or other similar opportunities regarding the application, consistent
with the Party’s laws and regulations.

2. Upon receipt by a Party’s competent authorities of a properly documented
countervailing duty application with respect to imports from the other Party, and
before initiating an investigation, the Party shall provide written notification to the
other Party of its receipt of the application and afford the other Party a meeting to
consult with its competent authorities regarding the application.

Article 3.9: Undertakings

1. After a Party’s competent authorities initiate an anti-dumping or
countervailing duty investigation, the Party shall transmit to the other Party’s
embassy or competent authorities written information regarding the Party’s
procedures for requesting its authorities to consider an undertaking on price
including the timeframes for offering and concluding any such undertaking, if
practicable.

2. In an anti-dumping investigation, where a Party’s competent authorities
have made a preliminary affirmative determination of dumping and injury caused
by such dumping, the Party shall afford due consideration and adequate opportunity
for consultations to exporters of the other Party regarding proposed price
undertakings which, if accepted, may result in suspension of the investigation
without imposition of anti-dumping duties, through the means provided for in the
Party’s laws, regulations, and procedures.

3. In a countervailing duty investigation, where a Party’s competent authorities
have made a preliminary affirmative determination of subsidisation and injury
caused by such subsidisation, the Party shall afford due consideration and adequate
opportunity for consultations to the other Party and exporters of the other Party
regarding proposed undertakings on price which, if accepted, may result in
suspension of the investigation without imposition of countervailing duties, through
the means provided for in the Party’s laws, regulations, and procedures.

Article 3.10: Investigation after Termination Resulting from a Review
The Parties agree to examine, with special care, any application for initiation of an

anti-dumping investigation on a good originating in the other Party and on which
anti-dumping measures have been terminated in the previous 12 months as a result

of a review. Unless this pre-initiation examination indicates that the circumstances
have changed, the investigation shall not proceed.

Section C: Committee on Trade Remedies

Article 3.11: Committee on Trade Remedies

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Trade Remedies (hereinafter
referred to as the “Committee”), comprising representatives at an appropriate level
from relevant agencies of each Party who have responsibility for trade remedies
matters, including anti-dumping, subsidies and countervailing measures, and
safeguards issues.

2. The functions of the Committee shall include:

(a)

(b)
(c)

(d)

(c)

(f)

enhancing a Party’s knowledge and understanding of the other
Party’s trade remedies laws, regulations, policies and practices;

overseeing the implementation of this Chapter;

improving cooperation between the competent authorities of the
Parties having responsibility for matters on trade remedies;

providing a forum for the Parties to exchange information on issues
relating to anti-dumping, subsidies and countervailing measures,
and safeguards;

providing a forum for the Parties to discuss other relevant topics of
mutual interest, including:

(1) international issues relating to trade remedies, including
issues relating to the WTO Doha Round Rules negotiations;
and

(ii) practices by the competent authorities of the Parties in anti-
dumping and countervailing duty investigations such as the
application of “facts available” and verification procedures;
and

cooperating on any other matter that the Parties may agree on, as

necessary.

3. The Committee shall meet at least once a year and may meet more
frequently as the Parties may agree.

CHAPTER FOUR
RULES OF ORIGIN

Article 4.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:

Cost, Insurance, and Freight (CIF) means the value of the good imported and
includes the cost of freight and insurance up to the port or place of entry into the
country of importation, in accordance with Article VII of GATT 1994 and the
Customs Valuation Agreement;

Free on Board (FOB) means the free on board value of a good, inclusive of the
cost of transport, from the producer to the port or site of final shipment abroad,
in accordance with Article VII of GATT 1994 and the Customs Valuation
Agreement;

fungible materials means materials that are of the same kind and commercial
quality, with the same technical and physical characteristics, and which cannot
be distinguished from one another for origin purposes by virtue of any markings
or mere visual examination;

materials means ingredients, raw materials, components, parts, or accessories
used in the production of goods;

packing materials and containers for transportation means the goods used
to protect goods during their transportation, different from those materials or
containers used for their retail sale;

preferential tariff treatment means tariff concessions granted to originating
goods as reflected by the tariff rates applicable under this Agreement;

Product Specific Rules (PSR) means the rules that specify that the materials
have undergone a change in tariff classification or a specific manufacturing or
processing operation, or satisfy a regional value content or a combination of any
of these criteria; and

production means methods of obtaining goods including growing, mining,
harvesting, raising, breeding, extracting, gathering, collecting, capturing,
fishing, trapping, hunting, manufacturing, producing, processing, or assembling
goods.

Article 4.2: Origin Criteria

For purposes of this Agreement, goods shall be considered as originating in a

Party if they have been:
(a) wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of a Party,
in accordance with Article 4.3;
(b) produced entirely in the territory of a Party using non-originating
materials provided the goods satisfy the requirements set out in
Annex 4-B; or
(c) produced entirely in the territory of a Party exclusively from

materials originating in the Parties

and meet all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

Article 4.3: Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

For purposes of Article 4.2(a), the following goods shall be considered as
wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of a Party:

(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)

(f)

plants and plant products grown and harvested, picked, or
gathered in that Party;

live animals born and raised in that Party;
goods obtained from live animals referred to in subparagraph (b);

goods obtained by hunting, trapping, fishing, aquaculture,
gathering, or capturing conducted in that Party;

minerals and other naturally occurring substances not included in
subparagraphs (a) through (d), extracted or taken from its soil,
waters, seabed, or beneath the seabed;

goods of sea-fishing and other marine products extracted or taken
by vessels registered with the Party and entitled to fly the flag of
that Party, and other products extracted or taken by the Party or
a person of that Party from the waters, seabed, or beneath the
seabed outside the territorial waters of the Party, provided that

the Party or a person of that Party has the rights to exploit! such
waters, seabed, and beneath the seabed in accordance with
international law’;

(g) goods of sea-fishing and other marine products extracted or taken
from the high seas by vessels registered with the Party and
entitled to fly the flag of that Party;

(h) goods produced or made on board factory ships registered with a
Party and entitled to fly the flag of that Party, exclusively from
goods referred to in subparagraph (f) or (g);

(1) articles collected from that Party which can no longer perform
their original purpose nor are capable of being restored or
repaired and are fit only for the recovery of parts of raw materials
or recycling purposes;

(Qj) waste and scrap derived from:

(i) manufacturing or processing operations conducted in that
Party; or

(ii) used goods collected in that Party, provided that such
goods are fit only for the recovery of raw materials; and

(k) goods obtained or produced in the territory of the Party solely
from goods referred to in subparagraphs (a) through (j).

Article 4.4: Not Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

1. For purposes of Article 4.2(b), goods shall be considered originating if
the regional value content (hereinafter referred to as the “RVC”’) is not less than
40 percent of the FOB value or the goods have undergone a change in tariff
classification at four digit-level (change in tariff heading) of the HS as a general
rule except those covered in Annex 4-B.

' The Parties understand that for purposes of determining the origin of goods of sea-fishing and other
goods, the “rights to exploit” include those rights of access to the fisheries resources of a coastal State,
as accruing from agreements or other arrangements concluded between a Party and the coastal State at
the level of governments or duly authorised private entities.

? International law refers to generally accepted international law such as the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.

2. For purposes of Article 4.2(b), the RVC shall be calculated in
accordance with any of the following methods:

(a) Build-Up Method

VOM
RVC = ----------------------- x 100%
FOB

VOM means value of originating materials, which includes the value of
originating materials, direct labor cost, direct overhead cost,
transportation cost, and profit.

(b) Build-Down Method

FOB - VNM
RVC = ----------------------- x 100%
FOB

VNM means value of non-originating materials, which shall be:

(1) the CIF value at the time of importation of the materials,
parts, or goods; or

(11) the earliest ascertained price paid for the materials, parts,
or goods of undetermined origin in the territory of the
Party where the working or processing has taken place.

Article 4.5: De Minimis

1. Goods that do not undergo a change in tariff classification shall be
considered as originating if:

(a) for goods, other than those provided in Chapters 50 through 63
of the HS, the value of all non-originating materials used in its
production that do not undergo the required change in tariff
classification does not exceed 10 percent of the FOB value of the
goods;

(b) for goods provided in Chapters 50 through 63 of the HS, the
weight of all non-originating materials used in its production that
do not undergo the required change in tariff classification does

not exceed 10 percent of the total weight of the goods;

and the goods specified in subparagraphs (a) and (b) meet all other applicable
criteria set forth in this Chapter for qualifying as originating goods.

2. The value of non-originating materials referred to in paragraph | shall,
however, be included in the value of non-originating materials for any
applicable RVC requirement for the goods.

Article 4.6: Minimal Operations

1. Notwithstanding any provision in this Chapter, goods shall not be
considered as originating in a Party if they have undergone only one or a
combination of any of the following operations or processes in the territory of

that Party:

(a) preserving operations to ensure that goods remain in good
condition during transport and storage;

(b) packaging and re-packaging, breaking-up, and assembly of
packages;

(c) simple washing, cleaning, removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint, or
other coverings;

(d) ironing or pressing of textiles or textile products;
(e) simple painting and polishing;

(f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of
cereals and rice;

(g) colouring sugar or forming sugar lumps;

(h) simple peeling, stoning, or un-shelling;

(1) sharpening, simple grinding, or simple cutting;

(j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, or matching;

(k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing

on cards or boards, and all other similar simple packaging
operations;

(1) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos, and other like
distinguishing signs on goods or their packaging;

(m) — simple mixing? of goods, whether or not of different kinds;

(n) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete
article;

(0) disassembly of products into parts;
(p) simple testing or calibrations; or
(q) slaughter of animals’.

2. For purposes of paragraph 1, simple describes operations or processes
which do not need special skills, or machines, apparatus, or equipment
especially produced or installed to carry out the operation or process.

3. Goods originating in the territory of a Party shall retain their initial
originating status when exported from the other Party, where operations
undertaken have not gone beyond those referred to in paragraph 1.

Article 4.7: Accumulation of Origin

Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, goods originating in the territory
of a Party, which are used in the territory of the other Party as materials for
finished goods eligible for preferential tariff treatment, shall be considered to be
originating in the territory of the latter Party where working or processing of the
finished goods has taken place.

Article 4.8: Treatment for Certain Goods

Notwithstanding Article 4.2, certain goods shall be considered to be originating
even if they have undergone working or processing outside the Parties, on
materials exported from a Party and subsequently re-imported there, provided

3 Simple mixing generally describes an activity which does not need special skills, or machines, apparatus,
or equipment especially produced or installed for carrying out the activity. However, simple mixing does
not include chemical reaction. Chemical reaction means a process (including a biochemical process)
which results in a molecule with a new structure by breaking intramolecular bonds and by forming new
intramolecular bonds, or by altering the spatial arrangement of atoms in a molecule.

* Slaughtering means the mere killing of animals and subsequent processes such as cutting, chilling, or
freezing for the purpose of preservation for storage and transport.

that the working or processing is done in the areas designated by the Parties
pursuant to Annex 4-C.

Article 4.9: Intermediate Goods

When originating goods are used in the subsequent production of other goods,
no account shall be taken of the non-originating materials contained in the
originating goods for purposes of determining the originating status of the
subsequently produced goods.

Article 4.10: Treatment of Packaging and Packing Materials

1. (a) If the goods are subject to the RVC criterion as set out in Article
4.4, the value of the packaging and packing materials for retail
sale shall be taken into account in the determination of origin,
where the packaging and packing materials are considered to be
taken as a whole with the goods.

(b) Where subparagraph (a) is not applicable, the packaging and
packing materials for retail sale, when classified together with
the packaged goods, shall not be taken into account in
considering whether all non-originating materials used in the
manufacture of the goods fulfil the criterion corresponding to a
change in tariff classification or a specific manufacturing or
processing operation of the said goods.

2. Packing materials and containers for transportation of goods shall not be
taken into account in determining the origin of the goods.

Article 4.11: Sets

1. Sets, as defined in Rule 3 of the General Rules for the Interpretation of
the Harmonised System, shall be considered as originating when all the
components of the sets are originating.

2. Nevertheless, when a set is composed of originating and non-originating
goods, the set as a whole shall be considered as originating, provided that the
value of the non-originating goods determined in accordance with Article 4.4
does not exceed 10 percent of the FOB value of the set.

Article 4.12: Accessories, Spare Parts, and Tools

1. For purposes of determining the originating status of goods, accessories,
spare parts, tools, and instructional or other information materials presented
with the good shall be considered as part of those goods and shall be disregarded
in determining whether all the non-originating materials used in the production
of the goods have undergone the applicable change in tariff classification or a
specific manufacturing or processing operation set out in Annex 4-B, provided
that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other
information materials presented with the goods are not invoiced
separately from the goods; and

(b) the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts, tools, and
instructional or other information materials presented with the
goods are customary for those goods.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if the goods are subject to the RVC
criterion, the value of the accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or
other information materials presented with the goods shall be taken into account
as originating materials or non-originating materials, as the case may be, in
calculating the RVC of the goods provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts, tools, and instructional or other
information materials presented with the goods are not invoiced
separately from the goods; and

(b) the quantities and value of the accessories, spare parts, tools, and
instructional or other information materials presented with the
goods are customary for those goods.

Article 4.13: Neutral Elements
In order to determine whether goods are originating, it shall not be necessary to
determine the origin of the following which might be used in its production and
not incorporated into the goods:
(a) fuel and energy;

(b) tools, dies, and moulds;

(c) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment
and buildings;

(d) lubricants, greases, compounding materials, and other materials
used in production or used to operate equipment and buildings;

(e) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, and safety equipment and
supplies;
(f) equipment, devices, and supplies used for testing or inspecting

the goods; and

(g) any other goods that are not incorporated into the goods but of
which use in the production of the goods can reasonably be
demonstrated to be a part of that production.

Article 4.14: Fungible Materials

1. For purposes of establishing the origin of goods, when the goods are
manufactured utilising originating and non-originating materials, mixed or
physically combined, the origin of such materials can be determined by
generally accepted accounting principles of inventory management practiced in
the territory of the exporting Party.

2. Once an inventory management method has been chosen, it must be used
throughout the fiscal year.

Article 4.15: Direct Consignment

1. Preferential tariff treatment shall be applied to goods satisfying the
requirements of this Chapter and which are transported directly between the
territories of the exporting Party and the importing Party.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, goods which involve transit through one
or more non-Parties, other than the territories of the Parties, shall be considered
to be consigned directly, provided that:

(a) the transit is justified for geographical reason or by consideration
related exclusively to transport requirement;

(b) the goods have not entered into trade or consumption there; and
(c) the goods have not undergone any operation other than unloading

and reloading or any operation required to keep them in good
condition.

3. For purposes of implementing paragraph 2, where transportation is
effected through the territory of one or more intermediate countries, other than
that of the exporting Party and the importing Party, the following shall be
produced to the relevant government authorities of the importing Party:

(a) a through Bill of Lading issued in the territory of the exporting
Party, which include a combination of any transport document
covering the entire transport route of the goods from the
exporting Party to the importing Party; or

(b) other relevant supporting documents, if any, as evidence that the
requirements of paragraph 2 are being complied with.

Article 4.16: Proof of Origin

A claim that goods shall be accepted as eligible for preferential tariff treatment
shall be supported by a Proof of Origin, in accordance with the Operational
Certification Procedures, as set out in Annex 4-A.

Article 4.17: Denial of Preferential Treatment

The importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment or recover unpaid
customs duties in accordance with its laws and regulations, where goods do not
meet the requirements of this Chapter or where the importer or exporter fails to
demonstrate compliance with the relevant requirements.

Article 4.18: Confidentiality

1. The Parties shall maintain, in accordance with their respective laws and
regulations, the confidentiality of classified business information collected in
the process of verification pursuant to Rule 15 of Annex 4-A and shall protect
that information from disclosure that could prejudice the competitive position
of the person who provided the information.

2. Subject to the laws and regulations and agreement of the Parties,
classified information may only be disclosed by the authorities of a Party to the
other Party, for the administration and enforcement of origin determination.

Article 4.19: Penalties

-10-

Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its laws and regulations, that
appropriate penalties, sanctions, or other measures are imposed for violations of
the laws and regulations related to this Chapter.

Article 4.20: Transitional Provisions for Goods in Transit or Storage

The provisions of this Agreement may be applied to goods which, on the date
of entry into force of this Agreement, are either in transit or in temporary storage
in a customs warehouse or free zone under customs control. For such goods, a
Proof of Origin may be completed retrospectively up to three months after the
entry into force of this Agreement, provided that the provisions of this Chapter
have been fulfilled.

Article 4.21: Product Specific Rules Transposition

For purposes of the transposition of the Product Specific Rules (PSR) set out in
Annex 4-B as a result of the amendments to the HS, the following subparagraphs
shall apply:

(a) Prior to the entry into force of an amended version of the HS, the
Parties shall undertake consultation to prepare updates to Annex
4-B that are necessary to reflect changes to the HS;

(b) The Parties shall ensure that the transposition of Annex 4-B is
carried out without impairing the PSR set out therein and is
completed within a reasonable period of time;

(c) The Joint Committee, upon recommendation of the Committee
on Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures, shall adopt the
transposition of the PSR in accordance with the nomenclature of
the revised HS; and

(d) The Parties shall promptly publish the adopted transposition
document of Annex 4-B in accordance with the nomenclature of
the revised HS.

Article 4.22: Consultations
The Parties shall consult regularly to ensure that provisions in this Chapter are

administered effectively, uniformly, and consistently in order to achieve the
spirit and objectives of this Chapter.

Article 4.23: Committee on Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures

The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Rules of Origin and Customs
Procedures pursuant to Article 5.21 (Committee on Rules of Origin and
Customs Procedures).

Article 4.24: Review and Modification

1. This Chapter may be reviewed and modified as and when necessary
upon request of a Party and may be open to such reviews and modifications as
may be agreed upon in the Joint Committee established under Article 11.1 (Joint
Committee).

2. Annexes and Appendices of this Chapter may be modified through
amendments endorsed by the Joint Committee. The amendments shall enter into
force 60 days after the date on which the Parties have notified in writing the
completion of their applicable legal procedures or on such date as the Parties
may agree.

-12-

CHAPTER FIVE
CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TRADE FACILITATION

Article 5.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:

competent authority means the authorities that are responsible under the law
of each Party for the administration and enforcement of its customs laws and
regulations;

customs laws and regulations means the statutory and regulatory provisions
relating to the importation, exportation, movement, or storage of goods, the
administration and enforcement of which are specifically charged to customs
authorities, and any regulations made by customs authorities, under their
Statutory powers;

customs procedure means the measures applied by the customs authority of a
Party to goods and to the means of transport that are subject to its customs laws
and regulations;

express consignment means all goods imported by or through an enterprise that
operates a consignment service for the expeditious cross-border movement of
goods and assumes liability to the customs authority for those goods; and
means of transport means various types of vessels, vehicles, and aircrafts
which enter or leave the customs territory of the Parties carrying persons, goods,
or articles.

Article 5.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:

(a) ensure predictability, consistency, and transparency in the
application of customs laws and regulations of the Parties;

(b) promote efficient administration of customs procedures and the
expeditious clearance of goods;

(c) simplify customs procedures of the Parties and harmonise them
to the extent possible with relevant international standards;

(d) promote cooperation among the customs authorities of the
Parties; and

(e) facilitate trade between the Parties, including through a
strengthened environment for global and regional supply chains.

Article 5.3: Scope

This Chapter shall apply to customs procedures applied to goods traded between
the Parties and the means of transport which enter or leave the customs territory
of the Parties.

Article 5.4: Consistency

l. Each Party shall ensure consistent implementation and application of its
customs laws and regulations throughout its customs territory. For greater
certainty, this does not prevent the exercise of discretion granted to the customs
authority of a Party where such discretion is granted by that Party’s customs
laws and regulations, provided that the discretion is exercised consistently
throughout that Party’s customs territory and in accordance with its customs
laws and regulations.

2. In fulfilling the obligation in paragraph 1, each Party shall endeavour to
adopt or maintain administrative measures to ensure consistent implementation
and application of its customs laws and regulations throughout its customs
territory, preferably by establishing an administrative mechanism which assures
consistent application of the customs laws and regulations of that Party among
its regional customs offices.

3. If a Party fails to comply with the obligations in paragraphs | and 2, the
other Party may consult with that Party on the matter relating thereto in
accordance with Article 5.20.

4. Each Party is encouraged to share with the other Party its practices and
experiences relating to the administrative mechanism referred to in paragraph 2
with a view to improving the operations thereof.

Article 5.5: Transparency

1. Each Party shall promptly publish, on the internet to the extent possible,
the following information in a non-discriminatory and easily accessible manner
in order to enable governments, traders, and other interested persons to become
acquainted with them:

(a) procedures for importation, exportation, and transit (including
port, airport, and other entry-point procedures), and required
forms and documents;

(b) applied rates of duties and taxes of any kind imposed on or in
connection with importation or exportation;

(c) fees and charges imposed by or for governmental agencies on or
in connection with importation, exportation, or transit;

(d) rules for the classification or valuation of products for customs
purposes;

(e) laws, regulations, and administrative rulings of general
application relating to rules of origin;

(f) import, export, or transit restrictions or prohibitions;

(g) penalty provisions for breaches of import, export, or transit
formalities;

(h) procedures for appeal or review;

(1) agreements to which it is party, or parts thereof, with any country
or countries relating to importation, exportation, or transit; and

(j) procedures relating to the administration of tariff quotas.

2. In particular, each Party shall make available, and update to the extent

possible and as appropriate, the following through the internet:

(a)

(b)

a description! of its procedures for importation, exportation, and
transit, including procedures for appeal or review, that informs
governments, traders, and other interested persons of the
practical steps needed for importation, exportation, and transit;

the forms and documents required for importation into,
exportation from, or transit through the territory of that Party;
and

contact information for the enquiry points as well as information
on how to make enquiries on customs matters as provided for in
Article 5.6.

* Each Party has the discretion to state on its website the legal limitations of this description.

3. To the extent possible, when developing new, or amending existing,
customs laws and regulations, each Party shall publish, or otherwise make
readily available such proposed new or amended customs laws and regulations
and provide a reasonable opportunity for interested persons to comment on the
proposed customs laws and regulations, unless such advance notice is precluded.

4. Each Party shall, to the extent practicable and in a manner consistent
with its domestic law and legal system, ensure that new or amended laws and
regulations of general application related to the movement, release, and
clearance of goods, including goods in transit, are published or information on
them is otherwise made publicly available, as early as possible before their entry
into force, in order to enable traders and other interested persons to become
acquainted with them.

5. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as requiring the publication or
provision of information other than in the language of the Party.

Article 5.6: Enquiry Points

Each Party shall designate one or more enquiry points to answer reasonable
enquiries of interested persons concerning customs matters and to facilitate
access to forms and documents required for importation, exportation, and transit.

Article 5.7: Customs Procedures

1. Each Party shall ensure that its customs procedures and practices are
predictable, consistent, and transparent, and facilitate trade, including through
the expeditious clearance of goods.

2. Customs procedures of each Party shall, where possible and to the extent
permitted by its customs laws and regulations, conform with the standards and
recommended practices of the World Customs Organisation.

3. The customs authority of each Party shall review its customs procedures
with a view to their simplification to facilitate trade.

Article 5.8: Pre-shipment Inspection

1. Each Party shall not require the use of pre-shipment inspections in
relation to tariff classification and customs valuation.

2. Without prejudice to the rights of the Parties to use other types of pre-
shipment inspection not covered by paragraph 1, each Party is encouraged not
to introduce or apply new requirements regarding their use.

3. Paragraph 2 refers to pre-shipment inspections covered by the
Agreement on Pre-shipment Inspection, and does not preclude pre-shipment
inspections for sanitary and phytosanitary purposes.

Article 5.9: Pre-arrival Processing

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures allowing for the
submission of documents and other information required for the importation of
goods in order to begin processing prior to the arrival of goods with a view to
expediting the release of goods upon arrival.

2. Each Party shall provide, as appropriate, for advance lodging of
documents and other information referred to in paragraph 1 in electronic format
for pre-arrival processing of such documents.

Article 5.10: Advance Rulings

1. Each Party shall, to the extent permitted by its respective laws,
regulations, and administrative determinations, prior to the importation of a
good from a Party into its territory, issue a written advance ruling to an importer,
exporter, or any person with a justifiable cause, or a representative thereof, who
has submitted a written request containing all necessary information, with
regard to:

(a) tariff classification;

(b) whether a good is originating in accordance with Chapter Four
(Rules of Origin) under this Agreement;

(c) the appropriate method or criteria, and the application thereof, to
be used for determining the customs value under a particular set
of facts, in accordance with the provisions of the Customs
Valuation Agreement; and

(d) such other matters as the Parties may decide.

2. A Party may require that an applicant have legal representation or
registration in its territory. To the extent possible, such requirements shall not
restrict the categories of persons eligible to apply for advance rulings, with
particular consideration for the specific needs of small and medium-sized

enterprises. These requirements shall be clear and transparent and not constitute
a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination.

3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for issuing advance
rulings which:

(a) specify the information required to apply for an advance ruling;

(b) provide that each Party may, at any time during the course of an
evaluation of an application for an advance ruling, request that
the applicant provide additional information, which may include
a sample of the goods, necessary to evaluate the application;

(c) ensure that an advance ruling be based on the facts and
circumstances presented by the applicant and any other relevant
information in the possession of the decision-maker; and

(d) ensure that the advance ruling includes the relevant facts and the
basis for its decision.

4. Each Party shall issue an advance ruling in the official language of the
issuing Party or in the language it decides. The advance ruling shall be issued
within 90 days to the applicant upon receipt of all necessary information. Each
Party shall specify and make public such time period for the issuance of an
advance ruling prior to such an application. Should the competent authority have
reasonable grounds to issue the advance ruling later than the specified period,
after the receipt of the application, it shall notify the applicant of the ground for
such a delay prior to the end of the specified period.

5. A Party may decline to issue an advance ruling if the facts and
circumstances forming the basis of the advance ruling are the subject of
administrative or judicial review. A Party that declines to issue an advance
ruling shall promptly notify the applicant in writing, setting forth the relevant
facts, circumstances, and the basis for its decision to decline to issue the advance
ruling.

6. A Party may reject applications for an advance ruling where the
additional information requested, in writing, in accordance with paragraph 3(b)
is not provided within a reasonable, specified period, which is determined at the
time of the request for additional information and the Party requests the
additional information from the applicant in writing.

7. Each Party shall provide that advance rulings shall be valid from the date
they are issued, or another date specified in the ruling, provided that the laws,
regulations, administrative rules, and facts and circumstances, on which the
ruling is based remain unchanged. Subject to paragraph 8, an advance ruling

shall be valid for at least three years unless a shorter period is provided for in
the ruling due to the nature of the application, which shall be clearly stated in
the advance ruling in accordance with the respective laws and regulations of the
Parties.

8. Where a Party revokes, modifies, or invalidates an advance ruling, it
shall promptly provide written notice to the applicant setting out the relevant
facts and the basis for its decision, where:

(a) there is a change in its laws, regulations, or administrative rules;

(b) incorrect information was provided or relevant information was
withheld;

(c) there is a change in a material fact or circumstances on which the
advance ruling was based; or

(d) the advance ruling was in error.
9. Where a Party revokes, modifies, or invalidates advance rulings with
retroactive effect, it may only do so where the ruling was based on incomplete,

incorrect, false, or misleading information.

10. An advance ruling issued by a Party shall be binding on that Party in
respect of the applicant that sought it.

11. Each Party shall publish, at a minimum:

(a) the requirements for the application for an advance ruling,
including the information to be provided and the format;

(b) the time period by which it will issue an advance ruling; and

(c) the length of time for which the advance ruling 1s valid.
12. Each Party may make publicly available any information on advance
rulings which it considers to be of significant interest to other interested parties,
taking into account the need to protect commercially confidential information.
Article 5.11: Release of Goods
1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain simplified customs procedures for the
efficient release of goods in order to facilitate trade between the Parties. This

paragraph shall not require a Party to release a good if its requirements for
release have not been met.

2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures
that allow the goods to be cleared from customs within a period no longer than
that required to ensure compliance with its customs laws and regulations and,
to the extent possible, within 48 hours of the arrival of goods and lodgement of
all the necessary information for customs clearance.

3. If any goods are selected for further examination, such an examination
shall be limited to what is reasonable and necessary, and undertaken and
completed without undue delay.

4. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures allowing the release of
goods, prior to the final determination of customs duties, taxes, fees, and charges
if such determination is not done prior to, or upon arrival or as rapidly as
possible after arrival and provided that all other regulatory requirements have
been met. As a condition for such release, a Party may require a guarantee in
accordance with its laws and regulations that does not exceed the amount the
Party requires to ensure payment of customs duties, taxes, fees, and charges
ultimately due for the goods covered by the guarantee.

5. Nothing in these provisions shall affect the right of a Party to examine,
detain, seize, confiscate, or deal with the goods in any manner consistent with
its laws and regulations.

6. With a view to preventing avoidable loss or deterioration of perishable
goods,” and provided that all regulatory requirements have been met, each Party
shall provide for the release of perishable goods from customs control:

(a) under normal circumstances in the shortest possible time, and to
the extent possible in less than six hours after the arrival of the goods and
submission of the information required for release; and

(b) in exceptional circumstances where it would be appropriate to do
so, outside the business hours of its customs authority.

7. Each Party shall give appropriate priority to perishable goods when
scheduling any examinations that may be required.

8. Each Party shall either arrange or allow an importer to arrange for the
proper storage of perishable goods pending their release. Each Party may require
that any storage facilities arranged by the importer have been approved or
designated by its relevant authorities. The movement of the goods to those

2 For purposes of this provision, perishable goods are goods that rapidly decay due to their natural
characteristics, in particular, in the absence of appropriate storage conditions.

storage facilities, including authorisations for the operator moving the goods,
may be subject to the approval, where required, of the relevant authorities. Each
Party shall, where practicable and consistent with domestic legislation, upon the
request of the importer, provide for any procedures necessary for release to take
place at those storage facilities.

Article 5.12: Application of Information Technology

1. The Parties shall, to the extent possible, apply information technology
to support customs operations based on internationally accepted standards for
expeditious customs clearance and release of goods.

2. The Parties shall, to the extent possible, use information technology that
expedites customs procedures for the release of goods, including the submission
of data before the arrival of the shipment of those goods, as well as electronic
or automated systems for risk management targeting.

3, The Parties shall endeavour to make trade administration documents
available to the public in electronic versions.

4. The Parties shall endeavour to accept trade administration documents
submitted electronically as the legal equivalent of the paper version of these
documents.

5. In developing initiatives which provide for the use of paperless trade
administration, the Parties are encouraged to take into account international
standards or methods made under the auspices of international organisations.

6. The Parties shall cooperate to enhance the acceptance of trade
administration documents submitted electronically.

Article 5.13: Trade Facilitation Measures for Authorised Operators

1. Each Party shall provide additional trade facilitation measures related to
import, export, or transit formalities and procedures, pursuant to paragraph 3, to
operators who meet specified criteria, hereinafter called authorised operators.
Alternatively, a Party may offer such trade facilitation measures through
customs procedures generally available to all operators and is not required to
establish a separate scheme.

2. The specified criteria to qualify as an authorised operator shall be related
to compliance, or the risk of non-compliance, with requirements specified in a
Party's laws, regulations or procedures.

(a)

Such criteria, which shall be published, may include:

(1) an appropriate record of compliance with customs and
other related laws and regulations;

(ii) a system of managing records to allow for necessary
internal controls;

(iii) financial solvency, including, where appropriate,
provision of a sufficient security or guarantee; and

(iv) supply chain security.

(b) Such criteria shall not:

(i) be designed or applied so as to afford or create arbitrary
or unjustifiable discrimination between operators where
the same conditions prevail; and

(ii) to the extent possible, restrict the participation of small
and medium-sized enterprises.

3. The trade facilitation measures provided pursuant to paragraph 1 shall

include at least three of the following measures:

(a) low documentary and data requirements, as appropriate;

(b) low rate of physical inspections and examinations, as appropriate;

(c) rapid release time, as appropriate;

(d) deferred payment of customs duties, taxes, fees, and charges;

(e) use of comprehensive guarantees or reduced guarantees;

(f) a single customs declaration for all imports or exports in a given
period; and

(g) clearance of goods at the premises of the authorised operator or
another place authorised by a customs authority.

4. Each Party is encouraged to develop authorised operator schemes on the

basis of international standards, where such standards exist, except when such

3 A measure listed in subparagraphs (a) through (g) will be deemed to be provided to authorised operators
if it is generally available to all operators.

-10-

standards would be an inappropriate or ineffective means for the fulfilment of
the legitimate objectives pursued.

5. In order to enhance the trade facilitation measures provided to operators,
a Party shall afford to the other Party the possibility of negotiating mutual
recognition of authorised operator schemes.

6. The Parties are encouraged to cooperate, where appropriate, in
developing their respective authorised operator schemes using the contact
points in Article 5.20 through the following:

(a) exchanging of information on such schemes and on initiatives to
introduce new schemes;

(b) sharing of perspectives on business views and experiences, and
best practices in business outreach;

(c) sharing of information on approaches to mutual recognition of
such schemes; and

(d) considering ways to enhance the benefits of such schemes to
promote trade, and, in the first instance, to designate customs
officers as coordinators for authorised operators to resolve
customs issues.

Article 5.14: Risk Management

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain a risk management system for
customs control.

2. Each Party shall design and apply risk management in a manner so as to
avoid arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination, or disguised restrictions to
international trade.

3. Each Party shall concentrate customs control and, to the extent possible,
other relevant border controls, on high risk consignments and expedite the
release of low risk consignments. Each Party may also select, on a random basis,
consignments for such controls as part of its risk management.

4. Each Party shall base risk management on assessment of risk through
appropriate selectivity criteria. Such selectivity criteria may include, inter alia,
HS code, nature and description of the goods, country of origin, country from
which the goods were shipped, value of the goods, compliance record of traders,
and type of means of transport.

Article 5.15: Express Consignments

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain customs procedures to expedite the
clearance of express consignments for at least those goods entered through air
cargo facilities while maintaining appropriate customs control and selection’,

by:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(f)

providing for pre-arrival processing of information related to
express consignments;

permitting, to the extent possible, the single submission of
information covering all goods contained in an express
consignment, through electronic means;

minimising the documentation required for the release of express
consignments;

providing for express consignment to be released under normal
circumstances as rapidly as possible, and within six hours when
possible, after the arrival of the goods and submission of the
information required for release;

endeavouring to apply the treatment in subparagraphs (a) through
(d) to shipments of any weight or value recognising that a Party
is permitted to require additional entry procedures, including
declarations and supporting documentation and payment of
duties and taxes, and to limit such treatment based on the type of
good, provided that the treatment is not limited to low value
goods such as documents; and

providing, to the extent possible, for a de minimis shipment value
or dutiable amount for which customs duties and taxes will not
be collected, aside from certain prescribed goods. Internal taxes,
such as value added taxes and excise taxes, applied to imports
consistently with Article III of GATT 1994, are not subject to
this provision.

2. Nothing in paragraph | shall affect the right of a Party to examine, detain,
seize, confiscate, or refuse the entry of goods, or to carry out post-clearance
audit, including in connection with the use of risk management systems. Further,
nothing in paragraph | shall prevent a Party from requiring, as a condition for

4 In cases where a Party has an existing procedure that provides the treatment in this Article, this provision
would not require that Party to introduce separate expedited release procedure.

-12-

release, the submission of additional information and the fulfilment of non-
automatic licensing requirements.

Article 5.16: Post-clearance Audit

1. With a view to expediting the release of goods, each Party shall adopt or
maintain post-clearance audit to ensure compliance with customs and other
related laws and regulations.

2. Each Party shall select a person or a consignment for post-clearance
audit in a risk-based manner, which may include appropriate selectivity criteria.
Each Party shall conduct post-clearance audits in a transparent manner. Where
the person is involved in the audit process and conclusive results have been
achieved, the Party shall, without delay, notify the person whose record is
audited of the results, the person's rights and obligations, and the reasons for the
results.

3. The Parties acknowledge that the information obtained in post-clearance
audit may be used in further administrative or judicial proceedings.

4. The Parties shall, wherever practicable, use the result of post-clearance
audit in applying risk management.

Article 5.17: Time Release Studies

1. Each Party is encouraged to measure the time required for the release of
goods by the customs authority periodically and in a consistent manner, and to
publish the findings thereof, using tools such as the Guide to Measure the Time
Required for the Release of Goods issued by World Customs Organisation with
a view to assessing their trade facilitation measures and considering
opportunities for further improvement of the time required for the release of
goods.

2. Each Party is encouraged to share its experiences in the time release
studies referred to in paragraph 1, including methodologies used and bottlenecks
identified.

Article 5.18: Review and Appeal

-13-

1. Each Party shall provide that any person to whom its customs authority
issues an administrative decision> has the right, within its territory, to:

(a) an administrative appeal to or review by an administrative
authority higher than or independent of the official or office that
issued the decision; and

(b) a judicial appeal or review of the decision.

2. The legislation of a Party may require that an administrative appeal or
review be initiated prior to a judicial appeal or review.

3. Each Party shall ensure that its procedures for appeal or review are
carried out in a non-discriminatory manner.

4. Each Party shall ensure that, in cases where the decision on appeal or
review under paragraph 1(a) is not given either:

(a) within set periods as specified in its laws or regulations; or
(b) without undue delay,

the petitioner has the right to either further appeal to or further review by the
administrative authority or the judicial authority or any other recourse to the
judicial authority.°

5. Each Party shall ensure that the person referred to in paragraph 1 is
provided with the reasons for the administrative decision so as to enable such a
person to have recourse to procedures for appeal or review, where necessary.

6. Each Party shall ensure that the person referred to in paragraph | is not
treated unfavourably merely because that person seeks review of an
administrative decision or omission referred to in paragraph 1.

> An administrative decision in this Article means a decision with a legal effect that affects the rights and
obligations of a specific person in an individual case. It shall be understood that an administrative decision
in this Article covers an administrative action within the meaning of Article X of GATT 1994 or failure to
take an administrative action or decision as provided for in a Party's law and legal system. For addressing
such failure, each Party may maintain an alternative administrative mechanism or judicial recourse to direct
the customs authority to promptly issue an administrative decision in place of the right to appeal or review
under paragraph 1(a).

6 Nothing in this paragraph shall prevent a Party from recognising administrative silence on appeal or
review as a decision in favour of the petitioner in accordance with its laws and regulations.

-14-

7. Each Party is encouraged to make the provisions of this Article
applicable to an administrative decision issued by a relevant border agency other
than its customs authority.

8. The decision, and the reasons for the decision, of an administrative or
judicial review or appeal shall be provided in writing.

Article 5.19: Customs Cooperation

1. The customs authority of each Party may, as deemed appropriate, assist
the customs authority of the other Party, in relation to:

(a) the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

(b) developing and implementing customs best practice and risk
management techniques;

(c) simplifying and harmonising customs procedures;

(d) advancing technical skills and the use of technology;

(e) application of the Customs Valuation Agreement; and

(f) such other customs issues as the Parties may mutually determine.
2. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, provide the other Party with
timely notice of any significant administrative change, modification of a law or
regulation, or similar measure related to its laws or regulations that govern
importations or exportations, that is likely to substantially affect the operation
of this Chapter. The notice can be made in English or the Party’s language.
3. The customs authority of a Party may, as deemed appropriate, share with
the other Party, information and experiences on development of customs
administration.
4. The customs authorities of the Parties shall actively cooperate to resolve
difficulties arising during the import and export clearance in each Party.
Article 5.20: Consultation on Customs Procedures and Trade Facilitation
1. A Party may at any time request consultations regarding any significant
customs matter arising from the operation or implementation of this Chapter,

providing relevant details related to the matter. Such consultation shall be
conducted through the contact points and shall commence within 30 days

-15-

following the date of the receipt of the request, unless the Parties determine
otherwise.

2. In the event that such consultations fail to resolve the matter, the
requesting Party may refer the matter to the Committee on Rules of Origin and
Customs Procedures.

3. A Party shall designate one or more contact points for purposes of this
Chapter. Information on the contact points shall be provided to the other Party
and any changes of the said information shall be notified promptly.

Article 5.21: Committee on Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures

1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Rules of Origin and
Customs Procedures (hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”’), composed of
the competent authorities and relevant government authorities’ of the Parties.
The Committee shall be responsible for addressing rules of origin, origin
procedures, trade facilitation, and customs matters.

2. The Committee shall ensure the proper functioning of this Chapter and
Chapter Four (Rules of Origin).

3. The functions of the Committee shall include:

(a) ensuring the effective, uniform, and consistent administration of
this Chapter and Chapter Four (Rules of Origin);

(b) revising Annex 4-B (Product Specific Rules) on the basis of the
transposition of the HS and national nomenclatures;

(c) adopting customs practices and standards which facilitate
commercial exchange between the Parties, according to the
international standards;

(d) resolving any issues relating to the interpretation, application,
and administration of this Chapter and Chapter Four (Rules of
Origin), including tariff classification;

(e) presenting proposals for the approval of the Joint Committee on
the modifications of this Chapter and Chapter Four (Rules of

’ For purposes of this Article, “relevant government authorities” refers to Philippine agencies responsible
for monitoring, reviewing, analysing, and developing policies on matters relating to Chapter Four (Rules
of Origin).

-16-

Origin), including Annex 4-B (Product Specific Rules of Origin),
in the event a consensus is reached between the Parties;

(f) working on the possible development of an_ electronic
certification and verification system;

(g) regularly exchanging statistics in order to assess the utilisation
of preference under this Agreement and holding consultations in
respect of this matter;

(h) advising the Joint Committee of proposed solutions to address
issues relating to:

(i) interpretation, application, and administration of this
Chapter and Chapter Four (Rules of Origin);

(i1) tariff classification and customs valuation;

(iii) calculation of the regional value content; and

(iv) issues arising from the adoption by a Party of operational
practices not in conformity with this Chapter and Chapter
Four (Rules of Origin) which may adversely affect the

flow of trade between the Parties; and

(1) carrying out other functions as may be delegated by the Joint
Committee or as necessary.

4. The Committee may formulate resolutions, recommendations, or
opinions which it considers necessary for the attainment of the common
objectives and the functions of the mechanisms established under this Chapter
and Chapter Four (Rules of Origin).

5. The Committee shall meet every year or as otherwise agreed.

6. The Committee shall report to the Joint Committee on the results of each
of its meetings.

-17-

CHAPTER SIX
COMPETITION

Article 6.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:

Competition authority means:

(a) for Korea, the Korea Fair Trade Commission, or its successor;
and

(b) for the Philippines, the Philippine Competition Commission, or
its successor.

Competition laws means:

(a) for Korea, the Monopoly Regulation and Fair Trade Act and its
implementing regulations, and any amendments thereto; and

(b) for the Philippines, the Philippine Competition Act and its
implementing regulations, and any amendments thereto;

Consumer protection law means:

(a) for Korea, the Framework Act on Consumer, the Fair Labelling
and Advertising Act and their implementing regulations, and any
amendments thereto; and

(b) for the Philippines, the Consumer Act of the Philippines and its
implementing regulations, and any amendments thereto.

Article 6.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to promote competition in markets, and
enhance economic efficiency and consumer welfare through the maintenance of
competition laws to proscribe anti-competitive activities, and through bilateral
cooperation on the development and implementation of competition laws
between the Parties. The pursuit of these objectives will help secure the benefits
of this Agreement, including the facilitation of trade and investment between
the Parties.

Article 6.3: Basic Principles

1. Each Party shall implement this Chapter in a manner consistent with the
objectives of this Chapter.

2. Acknowledging each Party’s rights and obligations under this Chapter,
the Parties recognise:

(a) the sovereign rights of each Party to develop, set, administer and
enforce its own competition laws and competition policies; and

(b) the significant differences that exist between the Parties in
capacity and level of development in the area of competition law
and competition policy.

Article 6.4: Appropriate Measures against Anti-competitive Activities

l. Each Party shall maintain competition laws to proscribe anti-
competitive activities', and shall enforce those competition laws accordingly.

2. Each Party shall maintain an authority or authorities to effectively
implement its competition laws.

3. Each Party shall ensure independence in decision-making by its
authority or authorities in relation to the enforcement of its competition laws.

4. Each Party shall apply and enforce its competition laws in a manner
which does not discriminate on the basis of nationality.

5. Each Party shall apply its competition laws to all persons or entities
engaged in commercial activities. Any exclusions or exemptions from the
application of each Party’s competition laws shall be transparent and based on
grounds of public policy or public interest.

6. Each Party shall make publicly available its competition laws, and any
guidelines issued in relation to the administration of competition laws,
excluding internal operating procedures.

' Examples of such activities may include: a) anti-competitive agreements; b) abuses of
dominant position; and c) anti-competitive mergers and acquisitions.

7. Each Party shall make public the grounds for any final decision or order
to impose a sanction or remedy under its competition laws, and any appeal
therefrom subject to:

(a) (i) its laws and regulations;
(ii) its need to safeguard confidential information; or

(ii1) its need to safeguard information on grounds of public
policy or public interest; and

(b) redactions from the final decision or order based on any of the
grounds in subparagraphs (a)(i) through (i11) above.

8. Each Party shall ensure that before a sanction or remedy is imposed on
any person or entity for the violation of its competition laws, such person or
entity is given the reasons in writing, where possible, for the allegations that its
competition laws have been violated, and a fair opportunity to be heard and to
present evidence.

9. Each Party shall, subject to any redactions necessary to safeguard
confidential information, make the grounds for any final decision or order to
impose a sanction or remedy under its competition laws available to the person
or entity subject to that sanction or remedy.

10. Each Party shall ensure that any person or entity subject to the
imposition of a sanction or remedy under its competition laws has access to an
independent review of or appeal against that sanction or remedy.

11. Each Party recognises the importance of timeliness in the handling of
competition cases.

Article 6.5: Cooperation

The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation between their respective
competition authorities to promote effective competition law enforcement. To
this end, the Parties may cooperate on issues relating to competition law
enforcement, through their competition authorities, in a manner compatible with
their respective laws, regulations, and important interests, and within their
available resources. Such cooperation includes:

(a) notification by a Party to the other Party of its competition law
enforcement activities that it considers may substantially affect
the important interests of the other Party, as promptly and
reasonably as possible;

(b) upon request, discussion between the Parties to address any
matter relating to competition law enforcement that substantially
affects the important interests of the requesting Party;

(c) upon request, exchange of information between the Parties to
foster understanding or to facilitate effective competition law
enforcement; and

(d) upon request, coordination in enforcement actions between the
Parties in relation to the same or related anti-competitive activities.

Article 6.6: Confidentiality of Information

I. This Chapter shall not require the sharing of information by a Party
which is contrary to that Party’s laws, regulations, and important interests.

2. Where a Party requests confidential information under this Chapter, the
requesting Party shall notify the requested Party of:

(a) the purpose of the request; and
(b) — the intended use of the requested information.

3. The sharing of confidential information between the Parties and the use
of such information shall be based on mutually agreed terms and conditions
between the Parties.

4. If information shared under this Chapter is shared on a confidential basis,
then, the Party receiving that information shall:

(a) maintain the confidentiality of the information received;

(b) use it only for the purpose disclosed at the time of the request,
unless otherwise authorised by the Party providing the
information;

(c) not use it as evidence in criminal proceedings carried out by a
court or a judge unless, upon request of the Party receiving the
information, such information was provided for such use in
criminal proceedings through the diplomatic channel or other
channel established in accordance with the laws of both Parties;

(d) not disclose it to any other authority, person, or entity not
authorised by the Party providing the information; and

(e) comply with any other conditions required by the Party providing
the information.

Article 6.7: Technical Cooperation and Capacity Building

The Parties agree that it is in their common interest to work together on technical
cooperation activities to build necessary capacities to strengthen competition
policy development and competition law enforcement, taking into account the
availability of resources of the Parties. Technical cooperation activities may
include:

(a) sharing of relevant experiences and non-confidential information
on development and implementation of competition law and
competition policy;

(b) exchange of consultants and experts on competition law and
policy;
(c) exchange of officials of competition authorities for training

purposes;

(d) participation of officials of competition authorities in advocacy
programmes; and

(e) other activities as agreed by the Parties.

Article 6.8: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Chapter Nine (Dispute Settlement) shall not apply to matters arising under this
Chapter.

Article 6.9: Consultations

In order to foster understanding between the Parties, or to address specific
matters that arise under this Chapter, each Party shall, upon the request of the
other Party, enter into consultations. In its request, the requesting Party shall
indicate, if relevant, how the matter affects its important interests, including
trade or investment between the Parties. The requested Party shall accord full
and sympathetic consideration to the concerns of the requesting Party.

Article 6.10: Consumer Protection

1. The Parties recognise the importance of consumer protection laws and
enforcement of such laws as well as cooperation between the Parties on matters
related to consumer protection, in order to achieve the objectives set out in
Article 6.2.

2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain laws or regulations to proscribe the
use in trade of misleading practices, or false or misleading descriptions.

3. Each Party also recognises the importance of improving awareness of,
and access to, consumer redress mechanisms.

4. The Parties may cooperate on matters of mutual interest related to
consumer protection. Such cooperation shall be carried out in a manner
compatible with each Party’s laws and regulations and within their available
resources.

Article 6.11: State Enterprises

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from
establishing or maintaining a State enterprise, entrusting enterprises with special
or exclusive rights, or maintaining such rights.

2. With respect to State enterprises and enterprises entrusted with special
rights” or exclusive rights:

(a) Neither Party shall adopt or maintain any measure contrary to the

? Special rights are granted by a Party when it designates or limits to two or more the number of
enterprises authorised to provide goods or services, other than according to objective,
proportional and non-discriminatory criteria, or confers on enterprises legal or regulatory
advantages which substantially affect the ability of any other enterprise to provide the same
goods or services.

principles contained in Article 6.4°4; and

(b) The Parties shall ensure that such enterprises, specifically in
relation to their commercial activities, are subject to their
respective competition laws,

insofar as the application of these principles and competition laws does not
obstruct the performance, in law or in fact, of the particular tasks assigned to
them.

> Notwithstanding this paragraph, each Party understands that Article 6.4.4 shall only apply to
laws and policies which are adopted after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

“For greater certainty, Articles 6.4.4 and 6.11.2(a) shall not be construed to prevent the Parties
from adopting laws and policies regarding State enterprises in order to achieve legitimate
public policy or public interest.

CHAPTER SEVEN
ECONOMIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION

Article 7.1: Basic Principles

1. Recognising the importance of economic and technical cooperation in
further strengthening trade, investments, and economic relations between the
Parties and in support of the full utilisation and implementation of this
Agreement, the Parties shall undertake cooperation initiatives in areas of mutual
interest and benefit in accordance with their domestic laws and regulations.

2. The Parties shall undertake cooperation between their respective
governments, where necessary and appropriate, and shall endeavour to encourage
and facilitate the participation of the private sector, academe, and other relevant
organisations in the identification and implementation of cooperation initiatives.
3. Reaffirming the value of existing economic and technical cooperation
mechanisms, other than those established under this Agreement, the Parties shall

respect and encourage the continued implementation of their existing
cooperation mechanisms.

Article 7.2: Scope of Cooperation

1. The Parties, on the basis of mutual benefit, shall explore and undertake
cooperative activities focusing on the following areas:

(a) industrial development, including health and life sciences-
related manufacturing and cooperation on processing of
technology metals;

(b) innovation and research and development;

(c) micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs);

(d) creative and cultural industries, including cooperation on film;

(e) intellectual property;

(f) standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment
procedures;

(g) sanitary and phytosanitary measures;
(h) e-commerce; and
(1) other areas as may be agreed by the Parties.

2. The areas of cooperation shall cover priority sectors for trade and
investment promotion as agreed by the Parties.

3. The Parties shall also pursue cooperation as set out in Annex 7-A, Annex
7-B, and Annex 7-C.

Article 7.3: Forms of Cooperation

The forms of economic and technical cooperation may include, but are not
limited to:

(a) information exchange;

(b) sharing of best practices;

(c) training of human resources (HR);

(d) exchange of experts;

(e) trade and investment promotion;

(f) business fora;

(g) technical assistance;

(h) joint research and development;

(1) transfer of technology and new business models; and
(j) other forms of cooperation as may be agreed by the Parties.

Article 7.4: Resources

1. The Parties shall cooperate to employ the most effective means and
endeavour to make available necessary financial and other resources for the
implementation of economic and technical cooperation under this Chapter in
accordance with their respective laws and regulations.

2. Taking into account the different levels of development and capacity,
the Parties shall contribute appropriately to the cost of implementation,
according to mutual agreement.

Article 7.5: Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation

1. For purposes of the effective implementation and operation of this
Chapter, a Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation (hereinafter
referred to as the “Committee’’) shall be established to be co-chaired by senior
officials from both Parties.

2. The functions of the Committee include, but are not limited to:
(a) reviewing, evaluating, and approving proposals for cooperation;

(b) collecting and consolidating the work plans of cooperation
developed by each of the committees formed within this
Agreement;

(c) agreeing on and developing areas of cooperation between the
Parties and establishing a work plan for the development of
cooperation;

(d) monitoring and evaluating the progress of the implementation of
cooperation projects and activities;

(e) providing regular reports to the Joint Committee under Article
11.1 (Joint Committee) of this Agreement; and

(f) carrying out other functions as may be agreed by the Parties.

3. The Parties agree to employ efficient mechanisms and guidelines for the
implementation of cooperation projects and activities under this Agreement,
subject to their respective laws and regulations.

4. The Parties recognise the role of the Joint Commission on Trade and
Economic Cooperation (JCTEC) established under the Memorandum of
Understanding between the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy of the
Republic of Korea and the Department of Trade and Industry of the Republic of
the Philippines on Trade and Economic Cooperation in facilitating
consultations, and promoting trade, investment, and economic cooperation
between the private and public sectors of the Parties.

5. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee shall meet at least
once a year. The meeting may be conducted in person or by any technological
means available to the Parties.

6. The Parties agree on an Implementing Arrangement building upon and
complementing existing bilateral and regional economic cooperation projects,
initiatives, and activities.

7. The Committee may establish sub-committees, as may be necessary, to

effectively implement the cooperation projects and activities under this Chapter
and those in the Implementing Arrangement.

Article 7.6: Non-Application of Dispute Settlement

Dispute settlement mechanisms in this Agreement shall not apply to any matter
arising under this Chapter.

CHAPTER EIGHT
TRANSPARENCY

Article 8.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:

administrative ruling of general application means an administrative ruling
or interpretation that applies to all persons and fact situations that fall generally
within its ambit and that establishes a norm of conduct but does not include:

(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or quasi-
judicial proceeding that applies to a particular person, good, or
service of the other Party in a specific case; or

(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or
practice.

Article 8.2: Publication

1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures, and
administrative rulings of general application relating to any matter covered by
this Agreement are promptly published or otherwise made publicly available.

2. To the extent possible, each Party, in accordance with its laws and
regulations, shall:

(a) publish in advance the measures referred to in paragraph | that
it proposes to adopt; and

(b) provide interested persons and the other Party with a
reasonable opportunity to comment on such proposed measures.

Article 8.3: Provision of Information

Upon the request of a Party, the other Party shall promptly provide information
and respond to questions pertaining to any actual or proposed measure referred
to in Article 8.2 that the requesting Party considers might affect the operation
of this Agreement.

Article 8.4: Administrative Proceedings

With a view to administering in a consistent, impartial, and reasonable manner
its laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative rulings of general
application relating to any matter covered by this Agreement, each Party shall
ensure, in its administrative proceedings, in which these measures are applied
to particular persons, goods, or services of the other Party in specific cases, that:

(a) wherever possible, in accordance with its applicable laws and
regulations, persons of the other Party that are directly affected
by a proceeding are provided reasonable notice, when a
proceeding is initiated, including a description of the nature of
the proceeding, a statement of the legal authority under which
the proceeding is initiated, and a general description of any
issues in controversy;

(b) persons of the other Party that are directly affected by a
proceeding are afforded a reasonable opportunity to present
facts and arguments in support of their positions prior to any
final administrative action, when time, the nature of the
proceeding, and the public interest permit; and

(c) its procedures are in accordance with its laws and regulations.

Article 8.5: Review and Appeal

1. In accordance with its laws and regulations, each Party shall establish
or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial, or administrative tribunals or procedures for
the purposes of the prompt review and, where warranted, correction of
administrative actions relating to any matter covered by this Agreement. Such
tribunals shall be impartial and independent of the office or authority entrusted
with administrative enforcement and shall not have any substantial interest in
the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, in such tribunals or procedures, the parties
to the proceeding are provided with the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective
positions; and

(b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record or,
where required by its laws and regulations, the record compiled

by the administrative authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided

_2-

for in its laws and regulations, that any decision referred to in subparagraph 2(b)
shall be implemented by, and shall govern the practice of, the office or authority
with respect to the administrative action at issue.

Article 8.6: Relation to other Chapters

In case of any inconsistency between the provisions of this Chapter and
provisions relating to transparency in other Chapters, the latter shall prevail to
the extent of the inconsistency.

CHAPTER NINE
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
Article 9.1: Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:
arbitration panel means a panel established under Article 9.7;

arbitrator means a member of an arbitration panel established under Article
9.7;

candidate means an individual who is under consideration for appointment as
the third arbitrator under Article 9.9;

complaining Party means a Party that requests the establishment of an
arbitration panel under Article 9.7; and

Party complained against means the Party that is alleged to be in violation of
this Agreement, as referred to in Article 9.3.

Article 9.2: Objective

1. The objective of this Chapter is to provide an effective, efficient and
transparent process for the avoidance and settlement of disputes arising under
this Agreement.

2. The Parties shall, at all times, endeavour to agree on the interpretation
and application of this Agreement and shall make every attempt through
cooperation and consultations to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of
any matter raised in accordance with this Chapter.

Article 9.3: Scope

1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this Chapter shall
apply with respect to the avoidance or settlement of disputes between the Parties
regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement wherever a Party

considers that:

(a) a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with its obligations
under this Agreement; or

-l-

(b) the other Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations
under this Agreement.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to the settlement of disputes arising from
the following: Article 2.16 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), Chapter Six
(Competition), and Chapter Seven (Economic and Technical Cooperation).

Article 9.4: Choice of Forum

1. Where a dispute regarding any matter arises under this Agreement and
under the WTO Agreement or any other agreement to which both Parties are
party, the complaining Party may select the forum in which to settle the dispute.

2. Once the complaining Party has requested the establishment of, or
referred a matter to, a dispute settlement panel under an agreement referred to
in paragraph 1, the forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of other fora.

Article 9.5: Consultations

1. Each Party may request consultations with the other Party with respect
to any matter relating to the interpretation and application of this Agreement,
pursuant to Article 9.3.1.

2. The Party requesting consultations shall make the request in writing
and shall give the reasons for the request, including the identification of the
specific measure at issue and an indication of the factual and legal basis for the
complaint.

3. The Party complained against shall reply within 10 days from the date
of the receipt of the request for consultations.

4. The Parties shall enter into consultations in good faith within 30 days,
or within 15 days in cases of urgency, including those concerning perishable
goods, from the date of receipt of the request for consultations, with a view to
reaching a mutually satisfactory solution. Unless the Parties otherwise agree,
consultations shall take place in the territory of the Party complained against.

5. During consultations, the Parties shall provide sufficient information
to enable a full examination of how the measure at issue might affect the
implementation and application of this Agreement. The Parties shall treat any

confidential information exchanged in the course of consultations on the same
basis as the Party providing the information.

6. Consultations under this Article shall be confidential and without
prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further proceedings.

Article 9.6: Good Offices, Conciliation, or Mediation

1. Good offices, conciliation, and mediation are procedures that may be
undertaken voluntarily if the Parties to the dispute so agree.

2. Good offices, conciliation, or mediation may be requested at any time
by either Party. They may begin at any time by agreement of the Parties and be
terminated at any time upon the request of either Party.

3. If the Parties agree, good offices, conciliation, or mediation may
continue while the proceedings of the arbitration panel provided for in this
Chapter are in progress.

4. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation, or mediation and, in
particular, positions taken by the Parties during these proceedings, shall be
confidential and without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further
proceedings.

Article 9.7: Establishment of the Arbitration Panel

1. The complaining Party that made a request for consultations under
Article 9.5 may request the establishment of an arbitration panel if:

(a) the Party complained against does not reply within 10 days from
the date of receipt of the request for consultations;

(b) the Party complained against does not enter into consultations
within 30 days, or within 15 days in cases of urgency, including
those concerning perishable goods, from the date of receipt of
the request for such consultations; or

(c) the Parties fail to resolve the dispute through consultations
within 60 days, or within 30 days in cases of urgency, including
those concerning perishable goods, from the date of receipt of
the request for such consultations.

2. The request for the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be made
in writing to the Party complained against. The complaining Party shall identify

-3-

in its request the specific measure at issue, and the factual and legal basis for the
complaint sufficient to present the problem clearly.

Article 9.8: Terms of Reference of the Arbitration Panel

Unless the Parties otherwise agree within 20 days from the date of receipt of the
request for the establishment of an arbitration panel, the terms of reference of
the arbitration panel shall be:

“To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement,
the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of an
arbitration panel pursuant to Article 9.7, to make findings,
determinations, and, if applicable, recommendations and to present
written reports as provided in Articles 9.12 and 9.13.”

Article 9.9: Composition of the Arbitration Panel

1. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, an arbitration panel shall consist
of three arbitrators.

2. The complaining Party and the Party complained against shall, within
30 days from the date of receipt of the request for the establishment of the
arbitration panel, each appoint one arbitrator who may be its national and
propose up to three candidates to serve as the third arbitrator who shall be the
chair of the arbitration panel. The candidates for the third arbitrator shall not be
nationals of either Party, nor have their usual place of residence in the territory
of either Party, nor be employed by either Party, nor have dealt with the dispute
in any capacity.

3. The Parties shall endeavour to agree on and appoint the third arbitrator
within 45 days from the date of receipt of the request for the establishment of
the arbitration panel, taking into account the candidates proposed. If the Parties
fail to agree upon and appoint the third arbitrator within 45 days, the Parties
shall meet within seven days from the expiry of the 45 days and select the chair
by lot from the list of candidates proposed by both Parties.

4. The date of the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be the date on
which the third arbitrator is appointed.

5. All arbitrators shall have expertise or experience in law, international
trade, or other matters relating to this Agreement, or in the resolution of disputes
arising under international trade agreements. Each arbitrator shall be
independent, serve in his or her individual capacity, and not be affiliated with,

nor take instructions from, either Party or organisation related to the dispute,
and shall comply with Annex 9-B.

6. Where a Party considers that an arbitrator does not comply with the
requirements of Annex 9-B, the Parties shall consult and replace, if so agreed,
that arbitrator in accordance with paragraph 7.

7. If an arbitrator appointed under this Article resigns or becomes unable
to participate in the proceedings, or is to be replaced according to paragraph 6,
a successor shall be selected within 15 days in accordance with the appointment
method provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3, mutatis mutandis. The successor
shall have all the powers and duties of the original arbitrator. The work of the
arbitration panel shall be suspended for a period beginning on the date the
arbitrator resigns or becomes unable to participate in the proceedings, or is to
be replaced according to paragraph 6. The work of the arbitration panel shall
resume on the date the successor is appointed.

Article 9.10: Proceedings of the Arbitration Panel

1. The arbitration panel shall meet in closed sessions. The Parties shall
be present at the meetings only when invited by the arbitration panel to appear
before it.

2. The Parties shall be given the opportunity to provide at least one
written submission and to attend any of the presentations, statements, or
rebuttals in the proceedings. All information provided or written submissions
made by a Party to the arbitration panel, including any comments on the interim
report and responses to questions put by the arbitration panel, shall be made
available to the other Party.

3. A Party asserting that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with
this Agreement shall have the burden of establishing such inconsistency. A
Party asserting that a measure is subject to an exception under this Agreement
shall have the burden of establishing that the exception applies.

4. The arbitration panel should consult with the Parties as appropriate and
provide adequate opportunities for the development of a mutually satisfactory
resolution.

5. The arbitration panel shall interpret this Agreement in accordance with
the customary rules of interpretation of public international law, including the

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.

6. The arbitration panel shall make its decisions, including its reports, by

-5-

consensus, provided that where an arbitration panel is unable to reach consensus,
the decisions may be made by majority vote.

7. Upon the request of a Party, or on its own initiative, the arbitration
panel may seek information from any relevant source and may consult experts
to obtain their opinion or technical advice on certain aspects of the matter.
Before doing so, the panel shall seek the views of the Parties to the dispute,
without prejudice to its right to seek information. The arbitration panel shall
provide the Parties with a copy of any advice or opinion obtained and an
opportunity to provide comments.

8. The deliberations of the arbitration panel and the documents submitted
to it shall be kept confidential.

9. Notwithstanding paragraph 8, either Party may make public statements
as to its views regarding the dispute, but shall treat as confidential, information
and written submissions delivered by the other Party to the arbitration panel
which the other Party has designated as confidential. Where a Party has
provided information or written submissions designated as confidential, that
Party shall, within 20 days from the request of the other Party, provide a non-
confidential summary of the information or written submissions which may be
disclosed publicly.

10. The reports of the arbitration panel shall be drafted without the
presence of the Parties. The arbitration panel shall base its reports on the
relevant provisions of this Agreement and the submissions and arguments of the
Parties, and may take into account any other relevant information provided to
the arbitration panel.

11. The reports of the arbitration panel shall contain both the descriptive
parts summarising the submissions and arguments of the Parties, and the
findings and determinations of the arbitration panel. If the Parties agree, the
arbitration panel may make recommendations for the resolution of the dispute
in its reports. The findings and determinations and, if applicable, any
recommendations of the arbitration panel cannot add to or diminish the rights
and obligations of the Parties provided for in this Agreement.

12. The venue for the arbitration panel proceedings shall be decided by
mutual agreement between the Parties. If there is no agreement, the venue shall
alternate between the capitals of the Parties with the first meeting of the
arbitration panel proceedings to be held in the capital of the Party complained
against.

Article 9.11: Suspension or Termination of Proceedings

1. Where the Parties agree, the arbitration panel may suspend its work at
any time for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date of such agreement.
Upon the request of a Party, the arbitration panel proceedings shall be resumed
after such suspension. In the event of such suspension, the timeframes regarding
the work of the arbitration panel shall be extended by the amount of time that
the work was suspended. If the work of the arbitration panel has been
continuously suspended for more than 12 months, the authority of the arbitration
panel shall lapse unless the Parties otherwise agree.

2. The Parties may agree to terminate the proceedings of an arbitration
panel by jointly notifying the chair of the arbitration panel at any time before
the issuance of the final report to the Parties.

3. Before the issuance of the final report to the Parties, the arbitration
panel may, at any stage of the proceedings, propose to the Parties that the dispute
be settled amicably.

Article 9.12: Interim Report

1. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the arbitration panel shall, within
90 days from the date of the establishment of the arbitration panel, issue to the
Parties an interim report containing the descriptive parts, the findings and
determinations, and, if applicable, any recommendations as to:

(a) whether the measure at issue is inconsistent with the obligations
of this Agreement; or

(b) whether a Party has otherwise failed to carry out its obligations
under this Agreement,

as well as the applicability of the relevant provisions and the basic rationale
behind any findings.

2. Where the arbitration panel considers that the deadline for the interim
report cannot be met, it may extend the period with the consent of the Parties
following a written notification stating the reasons for the delay and the date on
which the panel plans to issue its interim report. Under no circumstances should
the interim report be issued later than 120 days after the date of the
establishment of the arbitration panel.

3. Either Party may submit written comments to the arbitration panel on
its interim report within 15 days from the issuance of the report. After
considering any written comments by the Parties on the interim report, the
arbitration panel may modify its report and make any further examination it
considers appropriate.

Article 9.13: Final Report

1. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the arbitration panel shall issue a
final report to the Parties within 30 days from the date of issuance of the interim
report.

2. Where the arbitration panel considers that the deadline for its final
report cannot be met, it may extend the period with the consent of the Parties
following a written notification stating the reasons for the delay and the date on
which the panel plans to issue its final report. Under no circumstances should
the final report be issued later than 150 days after the date of the establishment
of the arbitration panel.

3. In cases of urgency, including those concerning perishable goods, the
arbitration panel shall make every effort to issue its interim and final reports
within half of the respective time periods under Article 9.12.1 and Article 9.13.1.

Article 9.14: Implementation of the Final Report

1. The determinations set out in the final report of the arbitration panel
shall be final and binding on the Parties.

2. If, in its final report, the arbitration panel determines that the Party
complained against has not conformed to its obligations under the relevant
provisions of this Agreement, unless the Parties otherwise agree, the Party
complained against shall eliminate the non-conformity immediately, or if this is
not practicable, within a reasonable period of time.

3. The reasonable period of time referred to in paragraph 2 shall be
mutually agreed upon by the Parties. Where the Parties fail to agree on the
reasonable period of time within 45 days from the date of issuance of the final
report of the arbitration panel, either Party may refer the matter to the original
arbitration panel, which shall determine the reasonable period of time.

4. The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party of any
measure that it has taken to comply with the determinations of the arbitration
panel, before the expiry of the reasonable period of time agreed by the Parties
or determined by the original arbitration panel in accordance with paragraph 3.
Where there is disagreement between the Parties as to whether the Party
complained against has eliminated the non-conformity as determined in the final
report of the arbitration panel within the reasonable period of time as determined
pursuant to paragraph 3, either Party may refer the matter to the original
arbitration panel.

Article 9.15: Compensation and Suspension of Benefits

1. If the Party complained against fails to notify the complaining Party of
the implementing measures before the expiry of the reasonable period of time,
or notifies the complaining Party that implementation is impracticable, or the
arbitration panel to which the matter is referred pursuant to Article 9.14.4
determines that the Party complained against has failed to eliminate the non-
conformity within the reasonable period of time, the Party complained against
shall, if so requested, enter into negotiations with the complaining Party with a
view to reaching a mutually satisfactory compensation.

2. If there is no agreement on satisfactory compensation within 20 days
from the date of receipt of the request mentioned in paragraph 1, the
complaining Party may, at any time, provide written notice to the Party
complained against that it intends to suspend the application of benefits under
this Agreement to the Party complained against. The complaining Party may
begin suspending benefits 30 days after the notification of such suspension. The
notification of suspension shall not be made within 20 days from the date of
receipt of the request mentioned in paragraph 1.

3. The compensation referred to in paragraph 1 and the suspension
referred to in paragraph 2 shall be temporary measures. Neither compensation
nor suspension is preferred to full elimination of the non-conformity as
determined in the report of the arbitration panel. The suspension shall only be
applied until such time as the non-conformity is fully eliminated or a mutually
satisfactory solution 1s reached.

4. In considering what benefits to suspend pursuant to paragraph 2:

(a) the complaining Party should first seek to suspend benefits with
respect to the same sector or sectors as that in which the report
of the arbitration panel referred to in Article 9.13 has found a
failure to comply with the obligations under this Agreement;

(b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not practicable or
effective to suspend benefits with respect to the same sector or
sectors, it may suspend benefits with respect to other sectors. The
notification of such suspension pursuant to paragraph 2 shall
indicate the reasons on which it is based; and

(c) the level of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall be
equivalent to the level of the nullification or impairment.

5. If the Party complained against considers that the requirements for the
suspension of benefits by the complaining Party set out in paragraph 2, 3, or 4
have not been met, it may refer the matter to an arbitration panel.

6. The arbitration panel that is established for purposes of this Article or
Article 9.14 shall, wherever possible, have, as its arbitrators, the arbitrators of
the original arbitration panel. If this is not possible, then the arbitrators of the
arbitration panel that is established for purposes of this Article or Article 9.14
shall be appointed pursuant to Article 9.9. The arbitration panel established
under this Article or Article 9.14 shall issue its report to the Parties within 20
days on the reasonable period of time and 45 days on the other issues after the
date when the matter is referred to it. When the arbitration panel considers that
it cannot issue its report within the aforementioned periods, the relevant period
may be extended by the arbitration panel for a maximum of 30 days with the
consent of the Parties. The report shall be binding on the Parties.

Article 9.16: Rules of Procedure

1. Dispute settlement proceedings under this Chapter shall be governed by
the Rules of Procedure set out in Annex 9-A. The Parties, in consultation with
the arbitration panel, may agree to adopt additional rules of procedures not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Annex.

2. Any period of time or other rules of procedure for arbitration panel
provided for in this Chapter or in Annex 9-A may be modified by mutual
consent of the Parties.

Article 9.17: Expenses

1. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, each Party shall bear the costs of its
appointed arbitrator and its own expenses and legal costs.

2. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the costs of the chair of the

arbitration panel and other expenses associated with the conduct of its
proceedings shall be borne in equal shares by the Parties.

-10-

CHAPTER TEN
EXCEPTIONS

Article 10.1: General Exceptions

For purposes of Chapter Two (Trade in Goods), Article XX of GATT 1994 and
its interpretative notes are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement,
mutatis mutandis.

Article 10.2: Security Exceptions
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:

(a) require a Party to furnish any information, the disclosure of
which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;

(b) prevent a Party from taking any action which it considers
necessary for the protection of its essential security interests:

(1) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition, and
implements of war and to such traffic in other goods
and materials as carried on, directly or indirectly, for
the purposes of supplying a military establishment;

(11) relating to fissionable materials or the materials from
which they are derived;

(111) taken so as to protect critical public infrastructure from
deliberate attempts intended to disable or degrade such
infrastructure; or

(iv) taken in time of national emergency, war, or other
emergency in international relations; or

(c) prevent a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its
obligations under the United Nations Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

2. The Joint Committee shall be informed to the fullest extent possible of
measures taken under subparagraphs 1(b) and (c) and of their termination.

Article 10.3: Taxation

1. Except as set out in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply
to taxation measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of
either Party under any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between
this Agreement and any such tax convention, the latter shall prevail to the extent
of the inconsistency. In the case of a tax convention between the Parties, the
competent authorities under that convention shall have sole responsibility for
jointly determining whether any inconsistency exists between this Agreement
and that convention.

3. This Agreement shall only grant rights or impose obligations with respect to
taxation measures where they are granted or imposed under Article 2.14
(National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation) of Chapter Two
(Trade in Goods), to the extent provided under Article III of GATT 1994.

4. For purposes of this Article:

(a) tax convention means a convention for the elimination of double
taxation with respect to taxes on income and capital gains and
the prevention of tax evasion and avoidance or any other
international taxation agreement or arrangement to which both
Parties are party;

(b) taxes and taxation measures do not include customs duties as
defined in Article 1.5 (General Definitions) and the measures
listed in the exceptions in subparagraphs (b), (c), (d), and (e) of
that definition; and

(c) competent authorities means:

(1) for Korea, the Deputy Minister for Tax and Customs,
Ministry of Economy and Finance, or his or her successor;
and

(11) for the Philippines, the Commissioner of the Bureau of
Internal Revenue, Department of Finance, or his or her
successor.

Article 10.4: Disclosure of Information

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to furnish or
allow access to confidential information the disclosure of which would impede

-2-

law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or which would
prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or
private.

Article 10.5: Confidentiality

Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, where a Party provides
information to the other Party in accordance with this Agreement and designates
such information as confidential, the other Party shall, subject to its laws and
regulations, maintain the confidentiality of the information.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

Article 11.1: Joint Committee

1. The Parties hereby establish a Joint Committee composed of relevant
government officials of each Party. It shall be co-chaired by ministerial level
officials of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy of Korea, and the
Department of Trade and Industry of the Philippines, or their respective

designees.
2. The Joint Committee shall:

(a) supervise the implementation of this Agreement;

(b) supervise and coordinate the work of all committees, working
groups, and other bodies established under this Agreement;

(c) review the implementation and operation of this Agreement;

(d) consider ways to further enhance trade and investment relations
between the Parties;

(e) without prejudice to the procedures under Chapter Nine
(Dispute Settlement), seek to resolve problems or disputes that
may arise relating to the interpretation or application of this
Agreement; and

(f) carry out any other function relating to the areas covered by
this Agreement as the Parties may agree.

3. The Joint Committee may:

(a) establish and delegate responsibilities to committees, working
groups, or other bodies as it considers necessary to assist it in
accomplishing its tasks;

(b) consider and adopt amendments to this Agreement, including

(c)

its annexes and appendices, subject to the completion of the
respective applicable legal procedures of the Parties;

adopt interpretations of the provisions of this Agreement;

(d) adopt its own rules of procedure; and
(e) make recommendations to the Parties.

4. When a Party submits information considered as confidential under its
laws and regulations to the Joint Committee, committees, working groups, or
any other body, the other Party shall treat that information as confidential.

Article 11.2: Procedures of the Joint Committee

1. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the Joint Committee shall meet
within one year from the entry into force of this Agreement and, thereafter,
convene:

(a) in regular session every year, with such sessions to be held
alternately in the territory of each Party; and

(b) in special session within 30 days from the receipt of a request
from either Party, with such sessions to be held in the territory
of the other Party or at such other location as the Parties may
agree.

2. The meetings of the Joint Committee may be held in person or, if
agreed by the Parties, by any technological means available to them.

3. All decisions and recommendations of the Joint Committee shall be
taken by mutual agreement.
Article 11.3: Committees and Working Groups

1. The following Committees, working groups, or any other bodies may
be established under the auspices of the Joint Committee:

(a) Committee on Trade in Goods;

(b) Committee on Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures;
(c) Committee on Outward Processing Zones;

(d) Committee on Trade Remedies; and

(e) Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation.

2. The composition, frequency of meetings, and functions of the
committees, working groups, or any other bodies shall be in accordance with
the relevant provisions of this Agreement or as determined by the Joint
Committee consistent with this Agreement.

3. The committees, working groups, or any other bodies shall inform the
Joint Committee of their schedules and agenda sufficiently in advance of their
meetings. They shall report to the Joint Committee on their activities at each
regular meeting of the Joint Committee.

4. The Joint Committee may decide to change or undertake the task
assigned to a committee, working group or any other body or may dissolve a
committee, working group, or any other body in accordance with the relevant
provisions of this Agreement.

Article 11.4: Contact Points

1. In order to facilitate communications between the Parties on any trade
matter covered by this Agreement, the Parties hereby establish the following
contact points:

(a) for Korea, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy, or its
successor; and

(b) for the Philippines, the Department of Trade and Industry, or
its successor.

2. Upon request of either Party, the contact point of the other Party shall
indicate the office or official responsible for any matter relating to the
implementation of this Agreement and provide the required support to facilitate
communications with the requesting Party. Each Party shall promptly notify the
other Party of any change in its contact point.

CHAPTER TWELVE
FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 12.1: Annexes, Appendices and Footnotes

The Annexes, Appendices and footnotes to this Agreement shall form an
integral part of this Agreement.

Article 12.2: Amendments

The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. Any such
amendments shall enter into force after the Parties exchange written
notifications through diplomatic channels certifying that they have completed
all necessary domestic legal procedures for the entry into force of the
amendments, on such date as the Parties may agree. The amendments shall
form an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 12.3: Amendments to the WTO Agreement

If any provision of the WTO Agreement that the Parties have incorporated into
this Agreement is amended, the Parties shall enter into consultations to
consider amending the relevant provisions of this Agreement, as appropriate,
in accordance with Article 12.2.

Article 12.4: Review of the Agreement

Five years after the date of the entry into force of this Agreement, and at any
time thereafter, this Agreement shall be subject to review, upon the request of
a Party, with a view to furthering its objectives.

Article 12.5: Entry into Force

This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month, or
on such other date as the Parties may agree, following the date of the exchange
of the written notifications through diplomatic channels, by which the Parties
inform each other that all necessary domestic legal procedures for the entry
into force of this Agreement have been completed.

Article 12.6: Termination

Either Party may terminate this Agreement by written notification through
diplomatic channels to the other Party. Such termination shall take effect six
months after the date of the notification.

Article 12.7: Authentic Texts

The Korean and English texts of this Agreement are equally authentic.